reserve bank of india
second quarter review of monetary policy 2011-12
by
dr. d. subbarao
governor
introduction
from a macroeconomic perspective, the last
quarter witnessed significant developments, both globally
and domestically. growth momentum in the us and the
euro area economies has weakened. in the euro area,
macroeconomic prospects are intimately tied in to its
ability to credibly resolve its sovereign debt and financial
sector problems. in turn, trade and financial linkages
increase the risks of euro area instability transmitting
through to emerging market economies (emes), which
have already experienced large volatility in their financial
markets, particularly their currency markets. significantly,
while the prices of many commodities declined over the
quarter, crude oil prices remained relatively firm. the
impact of this on commodity importing emes has been
exacerbated by currency depreciation.
2.
amidst this turbulence and heightened
uncertainty, the indian economy is clearly seeing slowing
growth. this moderation is, in part, due to the antiinflationary stance of monetary policy, a necessary precondition to bring inflation down. but there are also other
factors responsible for the moderation in growth,
particularly for the significant slowdown in investment
activity, such as policy and regulatory matters. these issues
clearly have adverse implications for sustaining rapid
growth.
3.
of larger concern is the fact that even with the
visible moderation in growth, inflation has persisted.
reassuringly, momentum indicators are turning down,
consistent with the reserve bank’s projections that
inflation rate will decline significantly in december and
continue on that trajectory into 2012-13.

4.
the policy stance and guidance in this review
are shaped by the need to balance concerns about
persistent inflation and moderating growth. recent
policy actions have been firmly based on the proposition
that sustained growth over a long period of time is
compatible only with low and stable inflation.
persistently high inflation strongly influences
expectations adversely and, through them, consumption
and investment decisions. changing the policy stance
when inflation is still far above the tolerance level entails
risks to the credibility of the reserve bank’s
commitment to low and stable inflation. however,
growth risks are undoubtedly significant in the current
scenario, and these need to be given due consideration.
5.
this policy review is set in the context of the
above global and domestic concerns. it should be read
and understood together with the detailed review in
macroeconomic and monetary developments released
yesterday by the reserve bank.
6.
this statement is organised in two parts. part a
covers monetary policy and is divided into four sections:
section i provides an overview of global and domestic
macroeconomic developments; section ii sets out the
outlook and projections for growth, inflation and
monetary aggregates; section iii explains the stance of
monetary policy; and section iv specifies the monetary
measures. part b covers developmental and regulatory
policies and is organised in six sections: interest rate
policy (section i), financial markets (section ii),
financial stability (section iii), credit delivery and
financial inclusion (section iv), regulatory and
supervisory measures for commercial banks (section
v) and institutional developments (section vi).

part a. monetary policy
i. the state of the economy
global economy
7.
economic activity in advanced economies
weakened further during q3 of 2011 (july-september).
escalating concerns over medium-term sovereign debt
dynamics in the euro area and, in particular, substantial
potential losses to banks holding this debt have impacted
global financial markets enormously. the adverse
feedback loops among sluggish growth, weak sovereign
balance sheets, large exposures of banks to sovereign
debt and political compulsions coming in the way of a
credible solution have created a crisis of confidence,
which is a potential threat to regional and global
financial stability.
8.
high prices of crude oil and other commodities,
persistently high unemployment and weak housing
markets continued to impact consumer confidence and
private consumption. fiscal tightening, driven by
medium-term sovereign debt concerns, also contributed
to the loss in the growth momentum. this is reflected in
the fall in the global manufacturing purchasing
managers’ index (pmi) to 49.9 in september, its lowest
level since june 2009.
9.
the above factors also had a knock-on impact on
major emes. according to the imf, global growth
decelerated from 4.3 per cent year-on-year (y-o-y) in q1
of 2011 to 3.7 per cent in q2, and further to an estimated
3.6 per cent in q3, as growth in advanced economies fell
from 2.2 per cent to 1.5 per cent and 1.3 per cent over
the same period.
10.
significantly, the weaker global growth since
q2 has resulted in only a small correction in
international commodity prices, particularly crude oil.
brent and dubai fateh prices (which comprise the
indian basket) have declined only modestly. the
world bank’s september 2011 indices of energy prices
were higher by 32 per cent (y-o-y) and of non-energy
by 17 per cent.
11.
reflecting the above trend, headline measures of
inflation remained above the comfort zones/targets in
both advanced economies and emes. in the case of
emes, strong domestic demand pressures added to
inflationary pressures. amongst major economies,

headline consumer price inflation (y-o-y) in september
2011 was 3.9 per cent in the us, 3.0 per cent in the euro
area, 5.2 per cent in the uk, 6.1 per cent in china, 7.3
per cent in brazil and 6.2 per cent in turkey. in response
to turbulent global conditions and domestic
considerations, central banks in major emes have
displayed a variety of responses, depending on their
specific macroeconomic conditions.
domestic economy
12.
gdp growth decelerated to 7.7 per cent in q1
(april-june) of 2011-12 from 8.8 per cent a year ago,
and 7.8 per cent in q4 of 2010-11. from the supply side,
the deceleration in growth in q1 was mainly due to
slower growth in mining, manufacturing, construction
and ‘community, social and personal services’.
13.
rainfall during the south-west monsoon was one
per cent above normal. the reserve bank’s production
weighted rainfall was also one per cent above normal.
the first advance estimates for the 2011-12 kharif
season point to record production of rice, oilseeds and
cotton. however, the output of pulses may decline due to
a reduction in acreage.
14.
industrial growth, as measured by the index of
industrial production (iip), decelerated to 5.6 per cent
during april-august 2011 from 8.7 per cent in the
corresponding period of the previous year. this was
mainly on account of slowdown in capital goods,
intermediate goods and consumer durables. growth of
eight core infrastructure industries during april-august
2011 also slowed down to 5.3 per cent from 6.1 per cent
in the corresponding period of last year.
15.
according to the reserve bank’s order books,
inventories and capacity utilisation survey (obicus),
capacity utilisation moderated during q1 of 2011-12
compared with
the previous quarter. business
sentiment, as indicated by the business expectations
index of the reserve bank’s industrial outlook survey,
declined in q2 of 2011-12 and showed further
moderation for the following quarter. pmi indices for
both manufacturing and services declined during
september 2011.

16.
based on an analysis of a sample of 2,426 nonfinancial companies, margins of corporates in q1 of
2011-12 moderated across sectors compared with their
levels in q4 of 2010-11. a classification of companies
into the use-based segments of the iip indicated that
the intermediate goods segment registered the
maximum decline in margins, reflecting the impact of
commodity prices. other segments saw lower margin
compression, suggesting that pricing power was
reducing, albeit gradually. early results for q2 of
2011-12 (of 161 companies analysed till october 20,
2011) suggest that both sales growth and margins
moderated marginally.
17.
y-o-y headline wpi inflation has remained
stubbornly high during the financial year so far,
averaging
9.6 per cent. inflation was driven by all the three major
groups, viz., primary articles; fuel and power; and
manufactured products. as indicated in the first quarter
review, both the level and persistence of inflation
remain a cause of concern. however, there is some
comfort coming from de-seasonalised sequential
quarterly wpi data which suggest that inflation
momentum has turned down.
18.
y-o-y primary food inflation was 9.2 per cent in
september 2011 as compared with 9.6 per cent in
august. the elevated level of primary food inflation was
mainly on account of increase in prices of vegetables,
milk and pulses.
19.
y-o-y fuel-group inflation increased from 12.8
per cent in august 2011 to 14.1 per cent in september
mainly due to the increase in petrol prices and upward
revision in electricity prices.
20.
y-o-y non-food manufactured products inflation
was 7.6 per cent in september as compared with 7.7 per
cent in august; it was 7.0 per cent in april. this should
be seen in comparison with the average non-food
manufactured product inflation of a little over 4.0 per
cent during the last six years. the current high level
reflects a combination of high commodity prices and
persistent pricing power as evidenced from the early
corporate results of q2 of 2011-12.
21.
y-o-y inflation as measured by the consumer
price index (cpi) for industrial workers, which had
moderated during april-july 2011, rose to 9.0 per cent
in august reflecting increase in food prices. the new

combined (rural and urban) cpi (base: 2010=100) rose
to 113.1 in september from 111.7 in august. inflation
based on other cpis was in the range of 9.3 to 9.4 per
cent during september.
22.
y-o-y money supply (m3) growth moderated
from 17.2 per cent at the beginning of the financial year
to
16.2 per cent on october 7, 2011. this level, however,
was still higher than the indicative projection of 15.5 per
cent for 2011-12, essentially reflecting the growth in
bank deposits as term deposit rates increased. in turn,
this has resulted in moderation in currency growth.
23.
although non-food credit growth decelerated
from 22.6 per cent on a y-o-y basis in april to 19.3 per
cent
on
october 7, 2011, it was still running higher than the
indicative projection of 18 per cent set out in the first
quarter review of monetary policy 2011-12.
disaggregated data on a financial year basis (aprilseptember) show that credit growth to industry
decelerated to 7.5 per cent from 8.1 per cent in the
previous year, with credit to infrastructure decelerating
sharply. there was also deceleration in credit growth in
services and personal loans. however, growth of
housing loans accelerated.
24.
the estimated total flow of financial resources
from banks, non-banks and external sources to the
commercial sector during the first half of 2011-12 was
around `5,00,000 crore, up from `4,80,000 crore during
the same period of last year. the deceleration in bank
credit was more than offset by higher flows from nonbank and external sources, particularly foreign direct
investment and external commercial borrowings,
reflecting still buoyant demand for financial resources.
25.
during the first half of 2011-12, the modal
deposit rate of banks increased by 80 basis points (bps)
to 7.45 per cent. the rise in deposit rates was relatively
sharper for maturities up to one year across the banking
system. during the same period, the modal base rate of
banks increased by 125 bps to 10.75 per cent.
26.
liquidity conditions continued to remain in
deficit during the current financial year (up to october
21), consistent with the anti-inflationary stance of
monetary policy. the liquidity deficit in the system, as
reflected by the daily borrowings under the liquidity
adjustment facility (laf) repos, averaged around

`47,000 crore till october 21, 2011. the systemic deficit
thus remained within one per cent of banks’ net demand
and time liabilities (ndtl), the comfort zone assessed
by the reserve bank.
27.
the central government’s key deficit indicators
widened during april-august 2011. this was due to
both deceleration in tax revenues and increase in
expenditure, particularly relating to fertiliser and
petroleum subsidies. the fiscal deficit during aprilaugust 2011 was 66.3 per cent of budget estimates as
compared with 58.4 per cent in 2010-11, even after
adjusting for higher than budgeted spectrum receipts.
28.
the central government has announced an
increase in the budgeted borrowing by about `53,000
crore to meet the shortfall in other financing items.
consequently, the revised gross (net) borrowings for the
year work out to about `5,23,000 crore (`4,06,000
crore). the central government raised 61 per cent of
gross (`3,20,000 crore) and 59 per cent of net market
borrowings (`2,41,000 crore) up to october 14, 2011.
29.
in the money market, the overnight interest rates
have remained generally close to the repo rate during
2011-12 so far. the 10-year benchmark government
security yield, which remained range-bound during the
first half of 2011-12, increased by 38 basis points during
october 2011 (to 8.82 per cent as on october 21),
reflecting in part, increased government borrowings for
the second half of the year.

recent weeks due to significant outflows by foreign
institutional investors (fiis), driven largely by global
risk aversion.
31.
between march and september 2011, the 6, 30
and 36-currency trade weighted real effective exchange
rates (reer) depreciated by 6.3 per cent, 2.0per cent and
4.1 per cent, respectively, primarily reflecting the nominal
depreciation of rupee against the us dollar by 8.7 per
cent. the rupee depreciated further against the us dollar
by 2.3 per cent between end-september and october 21,
2011. it is relevant to note in this context that the reserve
bank’s exchange rate policy is not guided by a fixed or
pre-announced target or band. the policy has been to
retain the flexibility to intervene in the market to manage
excessive volatility and disruptions to macroeconomic
stability.
32.
notwithstanding slowing and uncertain global
conditions, exports grew by 47 per cent during q1 of
2011-12 reflecting diversification in products and
destinations. during the same period, imports increased
by 33 per cent largely reflecting higher oil prices.
consequently, the trade deficit widened to us$ 35.4
billion in q1 of 2011-12 from us$ 32.3 billion in the
corresponding period of last year. if the current trend
persists, the current account deficit (cad) as a
percentage of gdp this year may be higher than it was
last year.

30.
following a period of stability in q1 of 2011-12,
equity and forex markets came under some pressure in
q2 of 2011-12 reflecting the volatility in the global
financial markets. domestic equity prices declined in

ii. outlook and projections
global outlook
growth
33.
global growth prospects have significantly
weakened over the past few months, primarily reflecting
increased concerns over sovereign debt sustainability in
some euro area countries. this has added to the existing
vulnerabilities in the major advanced economies arising
out of elevated oil and other commodity prices, high
unemployment rates, depressed consumer confidence
and weak housing markets. in contrast, growth has
remained relatively resilient in emes, notwithstanding

some moderation in response to monetary tightening.
however, a prolonged slowdown in advanced economies
would also weaken the growth prospects of emes. in its
september 2011 world economic outlook (weo), the
imf scaled down its projection for world gdp growth to
4.0 per cent for both 2011 and 2012 from its earlier
(june) projections of 4.3 per cent and 4.5 per cent,
respectively.
inflation
34.
despite significant weakening of economic
activity, global commodity prices have corrected only
marginally. supply limitations remain a key upside risk

to commodity prices. according to the imf (weo,
september 2011), consumer price inflation is likely to
increase from 1.6 per cent in 2010 to 2.6 per cent in
2011 in advanced economies, and from 6.1 per cent to
7.5 per cent in emerging and developing economies.
domestic outlook
growth
35.
in its may and july quarterly review
statements, the reserve bank projected gdp growth
of 8.0 per cent for 2011-12. the mid-quarter review of
september, however, pointed out that the risk to the
growth projection was on the downside mainly on
account of slowing down of the global economy and
moderating domestic demand. slower global growth
will have an adverse impact on domestic growth,
particularly on industrial production, given the rising
inter-linkages of the indian economy with the global
economy. the growth in the service sector is holding
up well, although some moderation is possible here too
on account of inter-sectoral linkages. based on the
normal south-west monsoon and first advance
estimates that suggest a record kharif production,
agricultural prospects look good. this should provide a
boost to rural demand. however, investment demand
has slackened reflecting slower clearance and
execution of projects, concerns about inflation and
rising interest rates. on these considerations, the
baseline projection of gdp growth for 2011-12is
revised downwards to 7.6 per cent(chart 1).

inflation
36.
going forward, the inflation path will be shaped
by both demand and supply factors. first, it will depend
on the extent of moderation in aggregate demand. some

signs of demand moderation are evident, although the
impact is being felt more on the investment side.
37.
second, the behaviour of crude prices will be a
crucial factor in shaping the outlook of domestic
inflation in the near future. despite the sluggish growth
prospects of the global economy, crude prices have
moderated only marginally. also, the benefit of decline
in global crude prices in the recent period so far has
been more than offset by the depreciation of the rupee
in nominal terms. thus, the exchange rate will also
have some impact on the behaviour of domestic
petroleum prices.
38.
third, the inflation outlook will also depend on
the supply response in respect of those commodities
where there are structural imbalances, particularly
protein items. therefore, concerted policy focus to
generate adequate supply response in respect of items
such as milk, eggs, fish, meat, pulses, oilseeds, fruits and
vegetables will play a major role in shaping the
behaviour of food inflation in the near term.
39.
fourth, there is still an element of suppressed
inflation as domestic prices of administered petroleum
products do not reflect the full pass-through of global
commodity prices. as the decline in crude prices has
been offset by the depreciation of the rupee, underrecoveries continue to occur in respect of administered
petroleum products. in addition, there are already large
accumulated under-recoveries. therefore, an increase in
administered petroleum prices cannot be ruled out even
in a scenario of stable or declining global crude prices.
in addition, there are other items such as coal whose
current prices do not reflect the underlying market
conditions. since coal is an input for electricity, coal
prices, as and when raised, will also have implications
for electricity tariffs.
40.
keeping in view the domestic demand-supply
balance, the global trends in commodity prices and the
likely demand scenario, the baseline projection for wpi
inflation for march 2012 is kept unchanged at 7 per
cent (chart 2). elevated inflationary pressures are
expected to ease from december 2011, though
uncertainties about sudden adverse developments
remain.

as always, these numbers are indicative projections
and not targets.
risk factors
43.
the indicative projections of growth and
inflation for 2011-12 are subject to several risks as
detailed below:
i)

41.
although inflation has remained persistently
high over the past two years, it is important to note that
during the 2000s, it averaged around 5.5 per cent, both
in terms of wpi and cpi, down from its earlier trend rate
of about 7.5 per cent. given this record, the conduct of
monetary policy will continue to condition and contain
perception of inflation in the range of 4.0-4.5 per cent.
this is in line with the medium-term objective of 3.0 per
cent inflation consistent with india’s broader integration
into the global economy.
monetary aggregates
42.
the current trends in money supply (m3) and
credit growth remain above the indicative trajectories
of the reserve bank. deposit growth has been much
higher this year than that in the last year due to
increase in interest rates, especially of term deposits.
credit growth showed some moderation for a time, but
thereafter it accelerated again. it is expected that
monetary aggregates will evolve along the projected
trajectory indicated in the first quarter review of
monetary policy. accordingly, m3 growth projection
for
2011-12
has
been
retained
at
15.5
per cent and growth of non-food credit at 18 per cent.

a major downside risk to growth emanates from the
global macroeconomic environment. while growth
in advanced economies is already weakening, there
is a risk of sharp deterioration if a credible solution
to the euro area debt and financial problems is not
found, in which case it will impact domestic growth
through trade, finance and confidence channels.

ii) despite recent moderation, global commodity prices
remain high. however, weakening of global
recovery has the potential to lead to significant
softening of crude prices, which will have
favourable impact for both growth and inflation.
iii) the government has announced increased market
borrowings, which can potentially crowd out more
productive private sector investment. the
government has indicated that this will not impact
the budgeted fiscal deficit. however, should the
fiscal deficit slip from the budgeted level, it will
have implications for domestic inflation. the large
fiscal deficit has been an important source of
demand pressure. clearly, the impact of tightening
monetary policy has been diluted by the
expansionary fiscal position, which is a sub-optimal
outcome.
iv) structural imbalances in protein-rich items such as
egg, fish and meat will persist. in particular,
production of pulses this year is expected to be
lower than last year. consequently, food inflation is
likely to remain under pressure.

iii. the policy stance
44.
the reserve bank began exiting from the crisis
driven expansionary policy in october 2009. since then,
the reserve bank has cumulatively raised the cash
reserve ratio (crr) by 100 basis points, and raised the
policy rate (the repo rate) 12 times by 350 basis points.
the effective tightening has been of 500 basis points as
liquidity in the system transited from surplus to deficit.
this monetary policy response has been calibrated on

the basis of india specific growth-inflation dynamics in
the broader context of persistent global uncertainty.
45.
considering the persistence of inflation at a level
much above the comfort zone of the reserve bank for
almost two years, the reserve bank persevered with its antiinflationary stance during the current year.
46.
the monetary policy tightening effected so far has
helped in containing inflation and anchoring inflation

expectations, even as both remain elevated. while the
impact of past monetary actions is still unfolding, it is
necessary to persist with the anti-inflationary stance.
against that background, the policy stance in this review is
shaped by the following two major considerations.
47.
first, both inflation and inflation expectations
remain high. inflation is broad-based and above the
comfort level of the reserve bank. further, these
levels are expected to persist for two more months.
risks to expectations becoming unhinged in the
event of a pre-mature change in the policy stance
cannot
be
ignored.
however,
reassuringly,
momentum
indicators,
particularly
the
deseasonalised quarter-on-quarter headline and core
inflation measures indicate moderation, consistent
with the projection that inflation will begin to
decline beginning december 2011.

48.
second, growth is clearly moderating on account
of the cumulative impact of past monetary policy actions
as well as some other factors. as inflation begins to
decline, the opportunity emerges for the policy stance to
give due consideration to growth risks, within the overall
objective of maintaining a low and stable inflation
environment.
49.
against this backdrop, the stance of monetary
policy is intended to:
•

maintain an interest rate environment to contain
inflation and anchor inflation expectations.

•

stimulate investment activity to support raising the
trend growth.

•

manage liquidity to ensure that it remains in
moderate deficit, consistent with effective monetary
transmission.

iv. monetary measures
50.
on the basis of current assessment and in line
with the policy stance outlined in section iii, the
reserve bank announces the following policy measures:
repo rate
51.
•

55.
the cash reserve ratio (crr) of scheduled banks
has been retained at 6.0 per cent of their net demand and
time liabilities (ndtl).

it has been decided to
increase the policy repo rate under the liquidity
adjustment facility (laf) by 25 basis points from
8.25 per cent to 8.5 per cent with immediate effect.

reverse repo rate
52.
the reverse repo rate under the laf,
determined with a spread of 100 basis points below
the repo rate, automatically adjusts to 7.5 per cent
with immediate effect.
marginal standing facility (msf) rate
53.
the marginal standing facility (msf) rate,
determined with a spread of 100 basis points above the
repo rate, stands recalibrated at 9.5 per cent with
immediate effect.
bank rate
54.

cash reserve ratio

the bank rate has been retained at 6.0 per cent.

guidance
56.
the projected inflation trajectory indicates that
the inflation rate will begin falling in december 2011
(january 2012 release) and then continue down a steady
path to 7 per cent by march 2012. it is expected to
moderate further in the first half of 2012-13. this
reflects a combination of commodity price movements
and the cumulative impact of monetary tightening.
further, moderating inflation rates are likely to impact
expectations favourably. these expected outcomes
provide some room for monetary policy to address
growth risks in the short run. with this in mind,
notwithstanding current rates of inflation persisting till
november (december release), the likelihood of a rate
action in the december mid-quarter review is relatively
low. beyond that, if the inflation trajectory conforms to
projections, further rate hikes may not be warranted.
however, as always, actions will depend on evolving
macroeconomic conditions.
57.
it must be emphasised, however, that several
factors – structural imbalances in agriculture,
infrastructure
capacity
bottlenecks,
distorted

administered prices of several key commodities and the
pace of fiscal consolidation – combine to keep mediumterm inflation risks in the economy high. these risks can
only be mitigated by concerted policy actions on several
fronts. in the absence of progress on these, over the
medium term, the monetary policy stance will have to
take into account the risks of inflation surging in
response to even a moderate growth recovery.
expected outcomes
58.
these actions and the guidance that is given are
expected to:
i)

continue to anchor medium-term inflation
expectations on the basis of a credible commitment
to low and stable inflation.

ii) reinforce the emerging trajectory of inflation,
which is expected to begin to decline in december
2011.
iii) contribute to stimulating investment activity.
mid-quarter review of monetary policy 2011-12
59.
the next mid-quarter review of monetary policy
for 2011-12 will be announced through a press release
on december 16, 2011.
third quarter review of monetary policy 2011-12
60.
the
third
quarter
review
of
monetary policy for 2011-12 is scheduled for tuesday,
january 24, 2012.

part b. developmental and regulatory policies
61.
this part of the statement reviews the progress
in various developmental and regulatory policy
measures announced by the reserve bank in the recent
policy statements and also sets out new measures.
62.
in an increasingly globalised world and closely
integrated financial markets, shocks in any one part of
the world are now quickly transmitted to the rest of the
world. this was clearly evident during the global
financial crisis of 2008, and now with the re-emergence
of global financial risks. this inter-connectedness has
reinforced the significance of financial stability for the
macroeconomic stability. financial stability has been
one of the key objectives of the reserve bank’s policy.
even as the financial system in india emerged
unscathed from the global financial crisis, there was
still a need to further strengthen the financial sector,
drawing lessons from the global financial crisis.

63.
in the banking sector, the focus of the reserve
bank’s regulatory policies in the recent period has been
to strengthen capital and liquidity norms and
macroprudential framework so that it remains resilient.
the thrust of various regulatory measures in the
financial markets is to make them more deep and liquid.
the reserve bank has also been strengthening the
regulation of systemically important non-banking
financial companies.
64.
the reserve bank has also been playing a
developmental role, although the focus of developmental
activity has changed from time to time. in the recent
period, concerted attention has been paid to promote
financial inclusion. in addition, the promotion of secure
and efficient technology based services remains on the
reserve bank’s priority agenda.

i. interest rate policy
deregulation of savings bank deposit interest rate
65.
as indicated in the second quarter review of
november 2010, the reserve bank prepared a discussion
paper on ‘deregulation of savings bank deposit interest
rate’, which was posted on its website in april 2011, for
public comments/suggestions. the discussion paper spelt
out both the pros and cons of deregulating the savings
bank deposit interest rate. the discussion paper evoked
wide-ranging responses from a cross-section of
stakeholders, ranging from the suggestion that savings
bank deposit interest rate should not be deregulated at all
to the suggestion that it should be deregulated
completely. the reserve bank has examined the
suggestions received and weighed the pros and cons of
deregulation of the savings bank deposit interest rate. on
balance, it is felt that the time is appropriate to move
forward and complete the process of deregulation of
rupee interest rates. accordingly, it has been decided:

•

to deregulate the savings bank deposit interest rate
with immediate effect; banks are free to determine
their savings bank deposit interest rate, subject to
the following two conditions:
(i) first, each bank will have to offer a uniform
interest rate on savings bank deposits up to `1
lakh, irrespective of the amount in the account
within this limit.
(ii) second, for savings bank deposits over `1
lakh, a bank may provide differential rates of
interest, if it so chooses. however, there
should not be any discrimination from
customer to customer on interest rates for
similar amount of deposit.

66.
the operational guidelines in this regard will be
issued separately.

ii. financial markets
financial market products
interest rate futures
67.
in pursuance of the announcement made in
the second quarter review of november 2010,
exchange traded interest rate futures (irfs) on 91-

day treasury bills with cash settlement in indian
rupees were permitted with effect from march 2011.
it was indicated in the monetary policy statement of
may 2011 that the guidelines for 5-year and 2-year
irfs were being finalised in consultation with the

securities and exchange board of india (sebi).
accordingly, it is proposed:
•

to issue the final guidelines on the cash settled 5year and 2-year irfs, including the final settlement
price by end-december 2011.

•

introduction of credit default swaps
68.
as announced in the monetary policy
statement of may 2011, the final guidelines on credit
default swaps (cdss) for corporate bonds were
issued in may 2011 with the indication that they
would be launched once the necessary market
infrastructure was in place. accordingly, it is
proposed:
•

to make the guidelines on cds effective by endnovember 2011.

review of short sale in government securities
69.
it was indicated in the monetary policy statement
of may 2011 that with a view to providing a fillip to the
irf market and the term repo market, the period of short
sale would be extended from the earlier limit of five days
to a maximum period of three months. the existing
reporting mechanism for short sale is being revised. it is
proposed:
•

funding requirement of the central and state
governments in an efficient and transparent manner.
however, there is a need to further broaden and deepen
the market for government securities and the allied
derivatives. accordingly, it is proposed:

to issue guidelines on short sale in government
securities by end-december 2011.

extension of dvp iii facility to gilt account holders
70.
it was announced in the monetary policy
statement of may 2011 to extend delivery versus
payment (dvp) iii facility to transactions by the gilt
account holders (excluding transactions between the gilt
account holders of the same custodian) so that the gilt
account holders get the benefit of efficient use of funds
and securities. the final guidelines were issued in july
2011.
financial market infrastructure
working group on the g-sec and interest rate
derivatives markets

to set up a working group comprising
representatives from various stakeholders to
examine and suggest ways for enhancing secondary
market liquidity in the g-sec and the interest rate
derivatives markets.

72.
details of the working group will be announced
separately.
committee for review of procedures relating to
facilities to individuals – residents/nris and pios
73.
it was indicated in the monetary policy
statement of may 2011 that a committee (chairperson:
smt. k. j. udeshi) was constituted by the reserve bank
to identify areas for streamlining and simplifying the
procedure so as to remove the operational impediments,
and assess the level of efficiency in the functioning of
authorised persons, including the infrastructure created
by them. the committee submitted its report in august
2011. the recommendations of the committee were
examined by the reserve bank. some of the
recommendations of the committee, which have already
been implemented, are: (i) permission to non-resident
indians (nris) to be joint holders in resident bank
accounts; (ii) permission to residents to be joint holders
in non-resident (external) rupee account (nre)
scheme/foreign currency (non-resident) (fcnr) account
(banks) scheme; (iii) permission to residents to gift
shares/debentures
up
to
us
$50,000 to non-residents; (iv) sale proceeds of foreign
direct investment (fdi) allowed to be credited to
nre/fcnr (b) accounts; and (v) permission to residents
to repay loans given to nris’ close relatives, as also bear
medical expenses of nris. other recommendations of the
committee are under examination.

71.
the various reform measures initiated since the
early 1990s have resulted in the development of a robust
government securities market that is able to meet the

iii. financial stability
financial stability and development council and its
sub-committee

74.
the financial stability and development
council (fsdc), set up in 2010, is assisted by a subcommittee, chaired by governor, reserve bank, and its

members include financial system regulators, the
finance secretary and other key ministry of finance
officials. in order to provide focused attention to the
broad areas of functioning of the fsdc and its subcommittee, the sub-committee has set up two
technical groups – a technical group on financial
inclusion and financial literacy and an interregulatory technical group. the technical group on
financial inclusion and financial literacy, headed by
the deputy governor in charge of financial stability in
the reserve bank, will include representatives from the
regulators and from the ministries and associated
departments of the central and state governments. the
inter-regulatory technical group, chaired by the
executive director in charge of the financial stability in
the reserve bank, will include representatives from the
four financial sector regulators, viz., the reserve bank,
the sebi, the insurance regulatory and development
authority (irda) and the pension fund regulatory and
development authority (pfrda) and will discuss
issues relating to systemic financial stability risks and
inter-regulatory co-ordination. both technical groups
will provide critical inputs to the sub-committee. the
secretariat of the sub-committee (financial stability
unit at the reserve bank) will act as the secretariat for
these two groups.
financial stability report
75.
the first financial stability
published by the reserve bank
subsequently, it was decided that
would publish fsrs twice every

report (fsr) was
in march 2010.
the reserve bank
year in june and

december. the june 2011 fsr, which included
contributions from the sebi and the irda, reflected the
deepening of inter-regulatory collaborative process for
financial stability assessment and presented a more
holistic position of risks and stress in the system. in
order to further enhance the coverage of the fsr so that
it adequately reflects the potential systemic risks facing
the whole of the economy, it has been decided that
beginning from the next fsr, the draft report will be
discussed in a meeting of the sub-committee of the
fsdc. the comments/suggestions of the members
would be suitably incorporated in the report before its
final release. in addition to the half-yearly fsrs, an
internal review of systemic risks facing the financial
system is undertaken in the interim period through
systemic risk monitors. financial market risk
monitors are also prepared on a monthly basis for
internal surveillance of various markets. the tools and
techniques used to assess the stability of the financial
sector are being improved over time.
assessment of financial stability
76.
the june 2011 fsr observed that the indian
financial system remained stable in the face of some
fragilities being observed in the global macro-financial
environment. the macroeconomic fundamentals for
india continued to be strong, notwithstanding the
prevailing inflationary pressures and concerns on the
fiscal front. the banking sector was resilient, though
going forward stress tests pointed to the strains in
profitability and asset quality. under severe stress tests,
banks might also face liquidity constraints.

iv. credit delivery and financial inclusion
branch authorisation policy relaxation
77.
considering the requirement of penetration of
banking in rural and semi-urban areas, domestic
scheduled commercial banks [excluding regional rural
banks (rrbs)] were permitted in december 2009 to
open branches in tier 3 to tier 6 centres (with
population up to 49,999 as per census 2001) and in the
rural, semi-urban and urban centres in north-eastern
states and sikkim under general permission, subject to
reporting. they were further mandated in july 2011 to
allocate at least 25 per cent of the total number of

branches proposed to be opened during a year in
unbanked rural centres (tier 5 and tier 6 i.e., population
up to 9,999 as per census 2001), so as to meet the
targets set out for providing banking services in villages
with population over 2,000 by march 2012, and
thereafter progressively to all villages over a period of
time. however, prior authorisation from the reserve
bank is required for opening of branches in tier 1 and
tier 2 centres, except in the case of north-eastern states
and sikkim where general permission has been granted.
78. these initiatives have led to increased pace in the
number of branches opened in tier 3 to tier 6 centres.

however, it is observed that branch expansion in tier 2
centres has not taken place at the desired pace. to
provide enhanced banking services in tier 2 centres, it is
proposed:
•

to permit domestic scheduled commercial banks
(other than rrbs) to open branches in tier 2
centres (with population 50,000 to 99,999 as per
census 2001) without the need to take permission
from the reserve bank in each case, subject to
reporting.

79.
the opening of branches by domestic scheduled
commercial banks (other than rrbs) in tier 1 centres
(centres with population of 1,00,000 and above as per
census 2001) will continue to require prior permission
of the reserve bank. while issuing such authorisation,
the reserve bank will continue to factor in, among
others, whether at least 25 per cent of the total number of
branches to be opened during a year are proposed to be
opened in unbanked rural centres.
80.
detailed guidelines in this regard will be issued
separately.
redefining the priority sector
81.
based
on
the
malegam
committee’s
recommendations, and as proposed in the monetary
policy statement of may 2011, the reserve bank set up
a committee (chairman: shri m. v. nair) to re-examine
the existing classification and suggest revised guidelines
with regard to priority sector lending classification and
related issues. the terms of reference of the committee
include revising the current eligibility criteria for
classification of bank loans as priority sector; review of
the definition of direct and indirect priority sector
finance; classification of bank lending through financial
intermediaries as priority sector lending; and the
consideration of capping interest rate on loans under the
eligible categories of the priority sector. the committee
first met on september 29, 2011 and it will submit its
report within four months from that date.
credit flow to the micro, small and medium
enterprises sector
82.
based on the recommendations of the high
level task force on the micro, small and medium
enterprises (msmes), the reserve bank issued
guidelines in june 2010, advising scheduled
commercial banks that the allocation of 60 per cent of

micro and small enterprises (mses) advances to micro
enterprises was to be achieved in stages, viz., 50 per
cent in the year 2010-11, 55 per cent in the year 201112 and 60 per cent in the year 2012-13. banks were
also mandated to achieve a 10 per cent annual growth
in the number of micro enterprise accounts and a 20 per
cent year-on-year growth in credit to the mse sector.
the reserve bank has been closely monitoring the
achievement of targets by banks on a half-yearly basis.
the last review of the achievement of targets was done
as on march 2011. it has been observed that 27 banks
(10 public sector banks, 7 private sector banks and 10
foreign banks) have attained the target of 50 per cent
advances to the micro enterprises, and another 27 banks
(9 public sector banks, 12 private sector banks and 6
foreign banks) have attained the target of 10 per cent
growth in the number of micro enterprises. similarly,
38 banks (22 public sector banks, 11 private sector
banks and 5 foreign banks) have attained the target of
20 per cent growth in credit to the mse sector.
meetings were held with all those banks which lagged
behind in achieving the targets to agree on a plan of
action for meeting the targets. the frequency of
monitoring has been changed from half-yearly to
quarterly with effect from the quarter ended june 2011.
rural credit institutions
licensing of co-operatives
83.
in terms of the recommendations of the
committee on financial sector assessment
(chairman: dr. rakesh mohan and co-chairman:
shri ashok chawla), and as proposed in the annual
policy statement of april 2009, the work relating to
licensing of unlicensed state and central co-operative
banks in a non-disruptive manner, in consultation
with national bank for agriculture and rural
development (nabard), has been initiated.
subsequent to the issuance of revised guidelines on
licensing of state co-operative banks (stcbs)/district
central co-operative banks (dccbs), 10 stcbs and
169 dccbs were licensed, bringing down the
number of unlicensed stcbs from 17 to 7 and
unlicensed dccbs from 296 to 127 by end-august
31, 2011.
revival of the rural co-operative credit structure
84.
the government of india, based on the
recommendations of the task force on revival of

rural co-operative credit institutions (chairman: prof.
a. vaidyanathan) and in consultation with the state
governments, had approved a package for revival of
the short-term rural co-operative credit structure. as
envisaged in the package, 25 states have entered into
memorandum of understanding (mou) with the
government of india and nabard and 21 states have
amended their respective state co-operative societies
acts. as on july 31, 2011, an aggregate amount of
`9,000 crore was released by nabard for
recapitalisation of primary agricultural credit societies
(pacs) in 16 states as the government of india’s share
under the revival package and as part of the
operationalisation of the recommendations of the
vaidyanathan committee.
roadmap for provision of banking services in
villages with population of over 2000
85.
in pursuance of the announcement made in
the monetary policy statement of april 2010, a
roadmap to provide banking services in every village
with a population of over 2000 was finalised by the
state level bankers’ committees (slbcs). in all,
74,386 villages as per 2001 census have been
identified. they have been allotted to various banks
for provision of banking services by march 2012.
banking outlets have been opened in 32,144 villages
across various states in the country. of these, 809
villages are covered through branches, 30,882
villages through branchless banking, i.e., business
correspondents (bcs) and 453 through other modes
like automated teller machines (atms), mobile
vans, etc., constituting 43 per cent of the target. of
the total 32,144 banking outlets opened, public
sector banks hold 85 per cent share, followed by
rrbs with 12 per cent and private sector banks with
3 per cent.
financial inclusion plan for banks
86.
it was indicated in the monetary policy
statement of may 2011 that all public and private
sector banks had prepared and submitted boardapproved three-year financial inclusion plans (fips),
containing targets for march 2011, 2012 and 2013, to
the reserve bank. in order to review the progress of
banks in the implementation of fips and making way
for accelerated progress in future, the reserve bank

has been conducting annual fip review meetings
with banks. based on discussions with banks, some
action points were conveyed to them.
87.
banks were advised to ensure close and
continuous monitoring of bcs. they were also
advised to focus, in future, on opening of some form
of low cost brick and mortar branches between the
base branch and bc locations. further, banks were
required to make efforts to increase the number of
transactions in no-frill accounts. there should be
seamless integration of the financial inclusion server
with their internal core banking solution (cbs)
systems and in the case of end-to-end solution, there
should be a clear demarcation of the technology
related activities and bc related activities of their
service providers. banks should initiate action for
registering with the unique identification authority
of india (uidai) and start opening accounts on the
basis of aadhaar information. public sector banks
should formulate fips for all rrbs sponsored by
them and develop an effective monitoring
mechanism so that targets assigned to the rrbs were
also achieved meticulously.
88.
the reporting format for monitoring the progress
made by banks under fips has been segregated under
qualitative and quantitative parameters. banks have been
mandated to submit quantitative reports on a monthly
basis and qualitative reports on a quarterly basis in
future.
urban co-operative banks
enhancement of limit and repayment period of
housing loan
89.
based on the representations received from the
urban co-operative banks (ucbs) and their associations,
it is felt that there is a need to increase the maximum
permissible limit of individual housing loans that can be
granted by the ucbs, as also to increase the maximum
repayment period for such loans. it is, therefore,
proposed:
•

to increase the individual housing loan limit from
`25 lakh to `30 lakh for tier i ucbs and from
`50 lakh to `70 lakh for tier ii ucbs, subject to
extant prudential exposure limits; and

•

to enhance the maximum repayment period of
housing loans from the present period of 15 years
to 20 years.

90.
detailed guidelines in this regard will be issued
separately.
licences for setting up new urban
co-operative banks
91.
as announced in the monetary policy statement
of april 2010, an expert committee (chairman: shri y.
h. malegam) was constituted in october 2010 with
representations from all stakeholders for studying the
advisability of granting licences for setting up new
ucbs. the committee was also mandated to look into
the feasibility of an umbrella organisation for the ucb
sector. the major recommendations of the committee,
which submitted its report in august 2011, include (i)
minimum entry point capital norms ranging between `50
lakh and `500 lakh depending upon the location and area
of operation; (ii) preference to be given to existing cooperative credit societies with a sound track record for
grant of licence; (iii) every new ucb to have a board of
management (bom) to be appointed by the board of
directors (bod) and a chief executive officer (ceo) to
be appointed by the bom; and (iv) setting up two
separate umbrella organisations, namely (a) a national
level organisation, which will provide payment and
settlement services and other services normally provided
by central banks as also liquidity support to its member
ucbs; and (b) one or more state level organisations or
outside agencies to provide information technology (it),
training and other services. the report of the committee
was placed in public domain, inviting comments up to
october 31, 2011. after receipt of feedback from the
public, the recommendations will be examined and
guidelines issued.
customer service
92.
recognising the need for revisiting the issue of
customer service in banks, a committee (chairman:
shri m. damodaran) was constituted by the reserve
bank in may 2010. the committee looked into the
banking services rendered to retail and small customers
and pensioners, structure and efficacy of the existing
grievance redressal mechanism, the functioning of
banking ombudsman scheme, and possibility of

leveraging technology for better customer service and
has recommended steps for improvement. the report
was published in july 2011 and placed in public domain
calling for comments/suggestions from all the
stakeholders.
93.
a large number of comments and suggestions
were received and examined with a view to translating
the recommendations into executable policies. however,
on account of a wide range of issues covered and certain
recommendations with far-reaching implications, it
would require some time to finalise the entire list of
implementable recommendations. in the interregnum, 88
recommendations on which a broad consensus has
emerged may be taken up for implementation initially.
further, in a recently concluded banking ombudsmen
conference, in which the indian banks’ association
(iba) together with the banking codes and standards
board of india (bcsbi) participated, 10 action points
were identified, which are essential to protect the rights
of the customers. accordingly, it is proposed:
•

to implement the recommendations of the
damodaran committee, on which a broad consensus
has emerged, as also the action points which were
identified by the iba and bcsbi in the last
banking ombudsmen conference.

94.
the matter will be pursued with the stakeholders
in respect of remaining recommendations of the
damodaran committee.

v. regulatory and supervisory measures for commercial banks
strengthening the resilience of the banking sector
95.
it was announced in the monetary policy
statement of may 2011 that the reserve bank would
adhere to internationally agreed phase-in period
(beginning january 1, 2013) for implementation of the
basel iii framework. the reserve bank is finalising the
draft guidelines for implementing basel iii framework
for the scheduled commercial banks operating in india. it
is proposed:
•

to issue the draft guidelines for implementing the
basel iii framework by end-december 2011.

96.
while at present, at the system level, banks in
india are adequately capitalised, and transition to basel
iii is expected to be smooth, careful capital planning
would be required by banks in view of substantially
higher equity requirement in capital. the draft guidelines
would form the basis for preliminary estimation of
capital requirements over the implementation phase of
basel iii.
implementation of advanced approaches under
basel ii framework
97.
guidelines on computation
of capital
requirements under the standardised approach
(tsa)/alternate standardised approach (asa) for
operational risk were issued in march 2010 and those for
internal models approach (ima) for market risk were
issued in april 2010. final guidelines for advanced
measurement approach (ama) for operational risk were
issued in april 2011. draft guidelines on internal rating
based (irb) approach for credit risk were issued in
august 2011. comments/suggestions received from
various stakeholders are under examination. it is
proposed:

provisioning buffers. essentially, these approaches
require build-up of capital and provision in good times,
which can be drawn down in bad times to enable banks
to absorb the losses and continue lending. while bcbs
has finalised a framework for countercyclical capital
buffer, the work on devising a framework for
countercyclical provisioning norm is still underway.
therefore, as an interim measure, a provisioning
coverage ratio (pcr) was introduced by the reserve
bank in december 2009 as a countercyclical measure to
ensure build-up of provisioning buffer when banks in
general were making good profits. this measure was
aimed at achieving a pcr of 70 per cent with reference
to the position as on september 30, 2010. since work is
still in progress by bcbs for devising a methodology
for countercyclical provisioning, the reserve bank has,
as a further interim measure, initiated work for devising
a forward looking provisioning framework reflecting the
credit history of indian banks, based on data collected
from select banks and data already available with the
reserve bank. accordingly, it is proposed:
•

to issue a discussion paper by end-march 2012, on
the proposed provisioning approach for comments.

working group on pricing of loans and advances

dynamic provisioning

99.
as part of financial sector reform, interest rates
on loans and advances have been deregulated in a
phased manner since 1997 and banks have been given
freedom to fix the rates. the base rate system was
introduced with effect from july 1, 2010, under which all
categories of loans and advances are priced with reference
to the base rate and banks are not permitted to lend
below the base rate. banks are required to determine
interest rates on advances with reference to the base rate
by adding a spread reflecting product specific charges
together with term premium and risk premium. while the
base rate can change depending on the cost of funds, the
spread over the base rate should undergo change only
when components of the spread undergo changes.

98.
after the financial crisis, the inherent procyclicality of regulatory capital and provisioning
requirement have attracted considerable attention.
consequently, work has been taken up at international
level by the basel committee on banking supervision
(bcbs) to introduce countercyclical capital and

100. in a deregulated environment, transparency in
pricing assumes greater significance in ensuring that the
risk is priced adequately and borrowers are charged
interest in a fair manner. it has, however, been observed
that in the case of floating rate loans, there is lack of
transparency in loan pricing and banks are also

•

to issue the final guidelines on irb approach for
credit risk by end-december 2011.

mispricing risk. instances where the spread charged to a
customer has been revised upward frequently during the
tenure of the floating rate loan, have also come to the
notice of the reserve bank. these have also resulted in a
situation where existing customers are at a disadvantage,
as compared with new customers with the same credit
rating, leading to customers complaining about
discrimination. in view of the above, it is proposed:
•

to set up a working group to look into principles
governing
proper,
transparent
and
nondiscriminatory pricing of credit.

prudential norms for restructuring of advances by
banks
101. an account, if restructured due to borrowers’
financial difficulties, is treated as being in default and
accordingly considered impaired as per international
prudential and accounting norms. accordingly, as per
extant guidelines issued by the reserve bank, accounts
classified as 'standard assets' should be immediately reclassified as 'sub-standard assets' upon restructuring.
however, if the restructuring is done as per a specified
framework prescribed by the reserve bank, certain asset
classification benefits are extended. these guidelines
have evolved over a period of time. the current
restructuring guidelines were formulated based on the
recommendations of the special group (chairperson:
smt. s. gopinath), which had representations from the
iba, among others. the restructuring guidelines, last
revised in august 2008, have generally helped both the
lenders and borrowers, especially during economic
downturns. however, the reserve bank has been
receiving requests from stakeholders to review the
restructuring guidelines in the light of experience gained.
in view of the above, it is proposed:
•

to constitute a working group to review the
existing prudential guidelines on restructuring of
advances by banks/financial institutions and suggest
revisions taking into account the best international
practices and accounting standards.

monitoring of unhedged foreign currency exposure
of corporates by banks
102. unhedged forex exposure of corporates is a source
of risk to corporates and a source of credit risk to
financing banks. if the unhedged position is large, it
can have serious consequences for the solvency of

corporates in the event of large depreciation of the
home currency and can result in large credit losses to
the financing banks. considering that a significant part
of corporates’ foreign currency commitments tended to
remain unhedged, banks were mandated in october
2001 to monitor and review on a monthly basis the
unhedged portion of the foreign currency exposures of
large corporates whose total foreign currency exposure
was relatively large (say, above us $25 million or its
equivalent). banks were further advised in december
2003 to put in place a policy that explicitly recognised
and took into account risks arising on account of
unhedged foreign exchange exposures of their clients.
banks were also advised that foreign currency loans
above us $10 million, or such lower limits as may be
deemed appropriate vis-a-vis the banks' portfolios of
such exposures, could be extended by banks only on
the basis of a well laid out policy of their boards with
regard to hedging of such foreign currency loans. these
instructions to banks were reiterated in december 2008.
further, banks were advised in december 2008 to
exchange information among themselves in respect of
borrowers enjoying credit facilities from more than one
bank, which should, inter alia, cover information
relating to derivative transactions and unhedged foreign
currency exposures of the borrowers.
103. recent events relating to derivative trades
showed that excessive risk taking by corporates could
lead to severe distress to them and large potential credit
loss to their bankers in the event of sharp adverse
movements in currencies. the recent episode of
volatility in rupee exchange rate when the rupee
depreciated by more than 10 per cent in a short period
of 6 weeks has sharply underlined the importance of
prudent management of foreign exchange risk. it is,
therefore, proposed that:
•

while extending fund based and non-fund based
credit facilities to corporates, banks should
rigorously evaluate the risks arising out of
unhedged foreign currency exposure of the
corporates and price them in the credit risk
premium. banks may also consider stipulating a
limit on unhedged position of corporates on the
basis of their board’s approved policy.

licensing of new banks in the private sector

104. following the announcement made by the
hon’ble finance minister in the union budget 2010-11
and as indicated in the monetary policy statement of
april 2010, the reserve bank released a discussion
paper on licensing of new banks on its website in august
2010, seeking views/comments of banks, non-banking
financial companies (nbfcs), industrial houses, other
institutions, and the public at large. detailed discussions
were also held with various stakeholders. all these
comments were examined and the draft guidelines on
licensing of new banks in the private sector were placed
on the reserve bank’s website in august 2011, inviting
comments from all the stakeholders up to october 31,
2011. it was indicated in the draft guidelines that certain
amendments to the banking regulation act, 1949 are
under consideration of the government of india,
including a few which are vital for finalisation and
implementation of the policy for licensing of new banks
in the private sector. once the amendments are in place,
and after examining the feedback on the draft guidelines,
the final guidelines will be issued and the process of
inviting applications for setting up of new banks in the
private sector will be initiated.
presence of foreign banks in india
105. pursuant to the announcement in the monetary
policy statement of april 2010, a discussion paper on
the presence of foreign banks in india was placed on the
reserve bank’s website in january 2011 soliciting
views/comments from all stakeholders, including banks,
non-banking financial institutions, and the public at
large. feedback/comments received from foreign banks
and other stakeholders have been consolidated and are
under examination. the comprehensive guidelines on
the mode of presence of foreign banks in india would be
formulated after factoring in the views/comments on the
discussion paper received from all concerned.
compensation practices
106. pursuant to the announcement made in the
monetary policy statement of may 2011, the reserve

bank is in the process of issuing the final guidelines on
compensation based on the financial stability board
(fsb) principles on sound compensation practices as
well as taking into account the guidelines issued by the
bcbs in may 2011 on range of methodologies for risk
and performance alignment of remuneration.
introduction of bank holding company/financial
holding company structure in india
107. a working group (chairperson: smt. shyamala
gopinath) was constituted to examine the introduction
of a holding company structure for banks and other
financial entities together with the required legislative
and regulatory framework. the group submitted its
report, and the same was placed on the reserve bank’s
website, inviting comments/feedback from all the
stakeholders.
comments
received
are
under
examination.
supervisory policies, procedures and processes:
comprehensive review
108. a high level steering committee (chairman: dr.
k. c. chakrabarty) was set up by the reserve bank to
review the existing supervisory processes in respect of
commercial banks in india. the terms of reference of the
committee, include (i) review of the approach to
supervision; (ii) review of the extant onsite supervisory
examination and offsite supervisory methods; (iii) review
of the adequacy of prudential supervisory guidelines and
supervisory review process; (iv) examination of the
extant methods for consolidated supervision; (v)
recommendation of the measures for strengthening the
extant cross-border supervisory cooperation processes;
(vi) assessment of the adequacy of the institutional
structure for carrying out supervisory function; and (vii)
suggestion for a framework for feedback mechanism. a
technical committee, comprising officers from the
reserve bank and representatives from a few banks, has
also been constituted to aid and assist the steering
committee. the steering committee will submit its
report by end-july 2012.

vi. institutional developments
non-banking financial companies
regulatory framework for non-banking financial
company – micro finance institution

109. as announced in the monetary policy statement
of may 2011, the broad framework of regulations
recommended by the malegam committee, which had
been constituted to study issues and concerns of the

micro finance institution (mfi) sector, was accepted by
the reserve bank. guidelines with regard to priority
sector treatment of mfi loans were also issued to banks.
it is further proposed:
•

to introduce a new category of nbfcs called nonbanking financial company – micro finance
institutions
(nbfc-mfis),
the
regulatory
framework of which will be broadly based on the
recommendations of the malegam committee.

110. detailed guidelines in this regard will be issued
by end-november 2011.
overseas investment by core investment companies
111. under the extant regulations, nbfcs desirous of
investing overseas require prior approval from the
reserve bank. these investments are allowed by the
reserve bank subject to certain eligibility conditions,
and only in the regulated financial activities. core
investment companies (cics), however, have as their
primary activity, investment in equity shares of group
entities for the sake of holding stake in these companies.
such group companies may be in different sectors of the
economy and not confined to the financial sector alone.
as a holding company, a cic may need to invest in nonfinancial entities overseas. it is, therefore, proposed:
•

to issue a separate set of guidelines for overseas
investment by cics in both financial and nonfinancial sector companies.

112. detailed guidelines in this regard will be issued
separately.
review of the existing regulatory framework for
nbfcs
113. the reserve bank had constituted a working
group (chairperson: smt. usha thorat) to examine a
range of emerging issues pertaining to the regulation
of the nbfc sector in view of their growing
importance and inter-connectedness with other
segments of the financial system, which will have a
bearing on financial stability. the major issues
examined by the committee were: definition and
classification of nbfcs keeping in view the need for
addressing regulatory gaps and regulatory arbitrage;
improving standards of governance in the sector; and
adopting appropriate approach to nbfc supervision.
the key recommendations of the committee, which
submitted its report in august 2011, are: minimum
asset size of more than `50 crore for registering any

new nbfc; 12 per cent as tier i capital; prescription
of a liquidity ratio for nbfcs; raising of the
percentage of total financial assets and income from
these assets to 75 per cent each of the total assets and
income respectively, from the existing stipulation of
50 per cent each for the classification of the entity as
an nbfc; asset classification and provisioning
norms to be made similar to banks; adopting
financial conglomerate approach for larger nbfcs;
and undertaking comprehensive inspection of nbfcs
having assets of `1,000 crore and more. the report
was placed on the reserve bank’s website for
comments/feedback from the public till september
30, 2011. the responses are under examination.
payment and settlement systems
working group for card-based transactions
114. as indicated in the monetary policy
statement of may 2011, a working group,
comprising
representatives
from
public/private/foreign banks, card companies,
national payments corporation of india (npci) and
the reserve bank, was formed to recommend an
action plan for enabling additional authentication for
transactions at points of sale (pos) using existing
cards in a cost effective manner and propose a
timeframe for migrating the card infrastructure to
enabling issuance and acceptance of chip-based and
personal identification number (pin)-based cards.
the recommendations of the group, which submitted
its report in june 2011, include (i) strengthening the
technology and payment infrastructure, like
implementation of unique key per terminal (ukpt)
and terminal line encryption (tle), etc., within 1824 months; (ii) introducing an additional factor for
all debit card transactions within 24 months for
domestic transactions; (iii) review of the progress
made in the roll out of aadhaar after 18 months so as
to examine the use of biometric finger print capture
in lieu of pin at the atm and pos as an additional
factor of authentication; (iv) introducing europay,
mastercard and visa (emv) chip and pin for credit
cards and debit cards by 5 and 7 years, respectively,
for all domestic transactions; and (v) emv chip card
and pin to be issued in lieu of magstripe cards when
at least one purchase is evidenced at an overseas
location. the recommendations of the group were

largely accepted, and suitable instructions were
issued to all the stakeholders in september 2011.
performance of national electronic funds transfer
system
115. all the refinements to the national electronic
funds transfer (neft) have been well accepted by the
stakeholders and the product is growing from strength
to strength in terms of acceptability, reach and volumes
handled. as at end-september 2011, around 79,500
branches of 103 banks participated in the neft system
and the volume of transactions processed increased to
17.5 million. a few banks have also successfully and
seamlessly brought the rrbs sponsored by them under
the neft ambit. more rrbs are expected to join the
neft soon.
it vision document for 2011-17
116. as indicated in the monetary policy statement of
may 2011, the high level committee (chairman: dr. k.
c. chakrabarty), constituted by the reserve bank to
prepare an it vision document for the period 2011-17,
made recommendations relating to both the reserve
bank and commercial banks. action points stemming
from the it vision document have been identified and a
standing committee (chairman: shri anand sinha) has
been formed to monitor the progress of implementation
of the it vision document. a steering committee
(chairman: shri g. padmanabhan) has been constituted
to ensure the smooth implementation of the
recommendations as given in the it vision document.
automated data flow from banks
117. as indicated in the monetary policy statement
of may 2011, a core group consisting of experts from
banks, the reserve bank, the institute for development
and research in banking technology (idrbt) and the
iba had prepared an approach paper on automated data
flow (a straight through process) from the cbs or other
it systems of commercial banks to the reserve bank.
following the reserve bank’s advice to put in place, at
the earliest, a system by which the reserve bank
returns can be sourced directly from the banks’ cbs
and other it systems without any manual intervention,
all banks have submitted their action plans. further,
they have been submitting quarterly progress in the
prescribed formats. some of the banks have already

started generating a few returns directly from their
source systems. to facilitate smooth and speedy
implementation, a working group with representatives
from a few banks has been formed. banks are being
advised to increase the pace of bringing the returns
under automated data flow and the progress in this
regard is being closely monitored.
real time gross settlement system
118. as indicated in the monetary policy statement
of may 2011, the working group constituted for
preparing an approach paper for implementing the next
generation real time gross settlement (ng-rtgs)
system, submitted the approach paper, the suggestions
of which were taken as a basis for preparing the
blueprint for the ng-rtgs system. the reserve bank
is in the process of identifying the suitable solution
under the guidance of a technical advisory group
(tag) with members from reputed technology
institutes, banks and the reserve bank.
currency management
119. one of the key recommendations of the high
level group on systems and procedures for currency
distribution (chairperson: smt. usha thorat) was that to
address the tendency of under-reporting of cases of
detection of counterfeit notes to the reserve bank/police,
the requirement of filing first information report (fir)
should be done away with, where any person
inadvertently in possession of counterfeit notes up to five
pieces tenders the same at a bank counter. taking into
account all relevant issues and in consultation with the
government of india, the reserve bank instructed the
banks that (i) for cases of detection of counterfeit notes
up to four pieces, in a single transaction, a consolidated
report should be sent to the police authorities at the end
of the month; and (ii) for cases of detection of counterfeit
notes of five or more pieces, in a single transaction, firs
should be lodged with the nodal police station/police
authorities as per jurisdiction. it will ensure that all cases
of detection of counterfeit notes at bank
branches/treasuries are promptly reported to the reserve
bank/police authorities.

mumbai
october 25, 2011

