प्रेस प्रकाशनी press release

भारतीय ररज़िव बैंक
संचार विभाग, केंद्रीय कायाालय, एस.बी.एस.मार्ा, मुंबई-400001
_____________________________________________________________________________________________________________________

department of communication, central office, s.b.s.marg, mumbai-400001
फोन/phone: 91 22 2266 0502 फैक्स/fax: 91 22 22660358

reserve bank of india

: www.rbi.org.in/hindi
website : www.rbi.org.in
इ-मेल email: helpdoc@rbi.org.in
वेबसाइट

june 07, 2016
second bi-monthly monetary policy statement, 2016-17
by
dr. raghuram g. rajan, governor
governor’s opening remarks at the press conference
monetary and liquidity measures
on the basis of an assessment of the current and evolving macroeconomic
situation, it has been decided to:


keep the policy repo rate under the liquidity adjustment facility (laf)
unchanged at 6.5 per cent;



keep the cash reserve ratio (crr) of scheduled banks unchanged at 4.0 per
cent of net demand and time liabilities (ndtl); and



continue to provide liquidity as required but progressively lower the average ex
ante liquidity deficit in the system from one per cent of ndtl to a position
closer to neutrality.

consequently, the reverse repo rate under the laf will remain unchanged at
6.0 per cent, and the marginal standing facility (msf) rate and the bank rate at 7.0
per cent.
assessment
2.
since the first bi-monthly statement of april 2016, global growth is uneven and
struggling to gain traction. world trade remains muted in an environment of weak
demand. in the united states, growth was slow once again in q1 because of
contracting industrial activity and exports. recent indicators of labour market activity
have also weakened. in the euro area, by contrast, q1 gdp rose strongly on the
back of robust consumer spending and recovering employment and business
conditions. in q2 so far, unemployment is falling, albeit slowly, and purchasing
managers’ sentiment is upbeat. in japan, growth surprised on the upside in q1, with
the economy escaping a technical recession, but industrial activity remains weak and
deflationary pressures are building.
3.
gdp growth slowed sequentially in china in q1, with retail sales, industrial
production and fixed investment showing signs of weakness in recent months amidst
still rising levels of indebtedness among households and corporations. while
macroeconomic stability is returning to some emerging market economies (emes),
geo-political tensions and high volatility in financial markets impede the resumption of
momentum, and the outlook remains challenging. the recent uptick in commodity

2
prices is providing some relief to commodity exporters but political events could
unsettle investor sentiment and consequently, capital flows could turn volatile again.
for commodity importers, net terms of trade gains are moderating.
4.
global financial markets have recorded gains through q2 of 2016, spurred by
risk-on investor sentiment. portfolio flows are returning, albeit hesitantly, to eme
debt and equity markets. the firmness in crude prices that set in around mid-march
has been supported in subsequent weeks by some temporary reductions in global
supply. gold prices remain elevated on safe haven demand. other non-energy
commodity prices remain stable with a hint of upside, while steel prices have firmed
appreciably. bond market yields across aes have eased steadily, reflecting strong
appetite in primary auctions in the face of the growing universe of negative yielding
bonds. the us dollar continues to mirror changes in expectations of monetary policy
action by the fed. the yen and the euro have remained strong despite ultraaccommodative monetary policies. among emes, some currencies are trading with
an appreciating bias, with the biggest gains recorded by the currencies that had
depreciated the most earlier.
5.
on the domestic front, the recently released provisional estimate of gross
value added (gva) for 2015-16 marginally scaled down the annual growth rate to 7.2
per cent, on a deceleration of services sector activity in relation to the advance
estimates. there was, however, a sequential pickup in activity in q4 in line with
expectations. as regards the current financial year, the india meteorological
department (imd) has forecast an above-normal and well-distributed south west
monsoon as el nino wanes – albeit with a slightly delayed onset. realisation of this
prediction is critical for the outlook for agriculture since reservoir levels have been
depleted to 17 per cent of capacity – 40 per cent lower than the level a year ago.
even though rabi procurement was lower in april-may 2016 than a year ago, midmay food stocks at 58 million tonnes were almost three times the norm for q1.
6.
the index of industrial production decelerated in 2015-16, mainly pulled down
by weak manufacturing in an environment of subdued investment demand and weak
rural consumption. in may 2016, the manufacturing purchasing managers’ index
(pmi) remained subdued on account of slowing output and export orders. however,
except for natural gas and crude oil, the core sector registered strong growth in april
2016 on account of a seasonal pick-up in industries like electricity, also supported by
a low base. there are signs that corporate performance is improving. available
information on q4 earnings suggests double digit growth in ebitda levels for nonfinancial corporates. the reserve bank’s latest rounds of forward looking surveys
indicate an improvement in the overall business situation, driven by a pick-up in
capacity utilisation and in order books – both domestic and external. these
developments have improved the expectation of business conditions in the first half
of 2016-17. public investment, especially in roads and railways, is gaining strength,
though the continuing weakness in private investment is of concern. demand
conditions are likely to improve going forward; consumer confidence is seen as rising
on improving expectations of employment and spending, with rural demand aided by
a stronger monsoon. rising capacity utilisation should prompt private investment.
7.
some high frequency indicators for april point to a firming recovery, although it
is still uneven. leading the upturn are cargo traffic at major ports, automobile sales
(especially two-wheelers and three-wheelers), commercial vehicle sales, passenger
air and freight traffic, cement production and steel consumption. abstracting from
seasonal effects, this suggests that the expansion, especially in the service sector, is
getting broad-based. on the other hand, railway freight traffic and passenger car

3
sales have decelerated on sector-specific constraints. purchasing managers in the
services sector indicated slowing new business in may and subdued expectations of
future activity.
8.
the ebbing of inflation pressures for two consecutive months to march, after a
period of steady rise, was interrupted once again in april. retail inflation measured by
the consumer price index (cpi) rose more sharply than expected due to a more-thanseasonal jump in food prices. within the food group, inflation in respect of
vegetables, fruits, sugar, meat and fish rose sizably from their prints in the previous
month. inflation in respect of pulses remained elevated; the recent decline in prices of
pulses reversed, yielding a sharp increase in april. production of pulses has fallen for
the second consecutive year, according to the third advance estimates for 2015-16.
there was also a firming of inflation relating to edible oils, spices and non-alcoholic
beverages. cereal inflation, however, remained subdued, reflecting supply
management efforts that expanded offtake from food stocks. inflation in respect of
the fuel group eased mainly due to firewood and stronger deflation in respect of lpg
prices. reflecting these recent inflation dynamics, three-months-ahead inflation
expectations of households moved up marginally in may.
9.
cpi inflation excluding food and fuel edged up in april, driven by prices of
petrol and diesel embedded in transport and communication. clothing and footwear
also registered moderate increases in inflation. services inflation remained elevated
on account of house rents, water charges, tuition fees and taxi/auto fares. excluding
petrol and diesel from this category, inflation was sticky and above 5 per cent.
however, since growth in rural wages and corporate staff costs have been modest,
cost-push factors may be subdued for the time being.
10.
despite the waning of liquidity pressures in early april, stronger-than-usual
currency demand during the first two months of the financial year and build-up of
cash balances by the government from the second week of may tightened liquidity
conditions from mid-may. in order to mitigate these pressures, the reserve bank
injected liquidity through purchases under open market operations (omos) of 700
billion during april-may in pursuance of the revised liquidity management framework
outlined in the april bi-monthly policy statement. additionally, liquidity was injected
through variable rate repos of various tenors, in addition to the regular 14-day term
repos and overnight fixed rate repo and msf. the average daily net liquidity injection
through the liquidity adjustment facility (including msf) declined from
1935 billion
in march 2016 to 1030 billion during april-may and further to 120 billion in june
(up to june 5, 2016). the weighted average call money rate (wacr) remained
closely anchored to the policy rate within a narrower corridor of +/- 50 basis points
around the policy repo rate. volatility also declined significantly. interest rates on
money market instruments such as certificates of deposit (cds) and commercial
paper (cps) also eased through the quarter so far.
11.
exports declined for the seventeenth consecutive month in april in us dollar
terms in spite of a modest increase in volume. the fall in crude oil prices led to lower
export realisations from petroleum products (pol), although the volume of shipments
of petroleum products is estimated to have picked up modestly. among non-oil items,
exports of gems and jewellery, drugs and pharmaceuticals, chemicals and electronic
goods improved over their levels a year ago. by contrast, exports of engineering
goods declined for the ninth straight month while readymade garments recorded a fall
for the fourth successive month. imports fell sharply and across constituents –
25 items accounting for a share of 87 per cent in total imports recorded a decline;
pol imports also declined, essentially reflecting lower prices. accordingly, the trade

4
deficit narrowed sequentially and was less than half its level a year ago. portfolio
flows resumed in april and may. the level of foreign exchange reserves rose to us $
360 billion by may 27, 2016.
policy stance and rationale
12.
the inflation surprise in the april reading makes the future trajectory of
inflation somewhat more uncertain. the expectations of a normal monsoon and a
reasonable spatial and temporal distribution of rainfall, along with various supply
management measures and the introduction of the electronic national agriculture
market (e-nam) trading portal, should moderate unanticipated flares of food inflation.
in addition, capacity utilisation indicators suggest that the available headroom in
industry could keep output prices subdued even as demand picks up. nonetheless,
there are upside risks – firming international commodity prices, particularly of crude
oil; the implementation of the 7th central pay commission awards which will have to
be factored into projections as soon as clarity on implementation emerges; the upturn
in inflation expectations of households and of corporates; and the stickiness in
inflation excluding food and fuel. taking these factors into account, the inflation
projections given in the april policy statement are retained, though with an upside
bias. considerable uncertainty surrounds these projections (chart 1), which should
be clarified by incoming data in the next few months.

13.
domestic conditions for growth are improving gradually, mainly driven by
consumption demand, which is expected to strengthen with a normal monsoon and
the implementation of the seventh pay commission award. higher public sector
capital expenditure, led by roads and railways, should crowd in private investment,
offsetting somewhat the subdued appetite for fresh private investment due to
financial stress. yet, business confidence will be restrained to an extent on account
of unrelenting global factors. on a reassessment of balance of risks, therefore, the
gva growth projection for 2016-17 has been retained at 7.6 per cent with risks
evenly balanced (chart 2).

5

14.
in its bi-monthly monetary policy statement of april 2016, the reserve bank
stated that it would watch macroeconomic and financial developments in the months
ahead with a view to responding as space opens up. incoming data since then show
a sharper-than-anticipated upsurge in inflationary pressures emanating from a
number of food items (beyond seasonal effects), as well as a reversal in commodity
prices. a strong monsoon, continued astute food management, as well as steady
expansion in supply capacity, especially in services, could help offset these upward
pressures. given the uncertainties, the reserve bank will stay on hold, but the
stance of monetary policy remains accommodative. the reserve bank will monitor
macroeconomic and financial developments for any further scope for policy action.
15.
more monetary transmission to support the revival of growth continues to be
critical. the government’s reform measures on small savings rates combined with
the reserve bank’s refinements in the liquidity management framework should help
the transmission of past policy rate reductions into lending rates of banks. the
reserve bank will shortly review the implementation of the marginal cost lending
rate framework by banks. timely capital infusions into constrained public sector
banks will also aid credit flow.
16.
the third bi-monthly monetary policy statement will be announced on august
9, 2016.

press release : 2015-2016/2834

sangeeta das
director

