प्रेस प्रकाशनी press release

भारतीय ररज़िव बैंक
संचार विभाग, केंद्रीय कायाालय, एस.बी.एस.मार्ा, मुंबई-400001
_____________________________________________________________________________________________________________________

department of communication, central office, s.b.s.marg, mumbai-400001
फोन/phone: 91 22 2266 0502 फैक्स/fax: 91 22 22660358

reserve bank of india

: www.rbi.org.in/hindi
website : www.rbi.org.in
इ-मेल email: helpdoc@rbi.org.in
वेबसाइट

february 02, 2016
sixth bi-monthly monetary policy statement, 2015-16
by dr. raghuram g. rajan, governor
monetary and liquidity measures
on the basis of an assessment of the current and evolving macroeconomic
situation, it has been decided to:


keep the policy repo rate under the liquidity adjustment facility (laf)
unchanged at 6.75 per cent;



keep the cash reserve ratio (crr) of scheduled banks unchanged at 4.0 per
cent of net demand and time liability (ndtl);



continue to provide liquidity under overnight repos at 0.25 per cent of bankwise ndtl at the laf repo rate and liquidity under 14-day term repos as well
as longer term repos of up to 0.75 per cent of ndtl of the banking system
through auctions; and



continue with daily variable rate repos and reverse repos to smooth liquidity.

consequently, the reverse repo rate under the laf will remain unchanged at
5.75 per cent, and the marginal standing facility (msf) rate and the bank rate at
7.75 per cent.
assessment
2.
since the fifth bi-monthly statement of december 2015, global growth has
slowed, with the ongoing weakening of activity in major emerging market economies
(emes) outweighing the recovery in some advanced economies (aes). world trade
has remained subdued, held down by anaemic demand, new lows in commodity
prices and currency realignments. in the united states, an improving labour market
continues to support a consumption-led recovery. manufacturing activity is sluggish,
however, reflecting retrenchment in oil and gas drilling activity and declining exports.
in the euro area, improving labour market and financing conditions are supporting
consumer spending and business investment. although core inflation and wage
growth are subdued, deflation risks appear to be receding. in japan, the combination
of exceptional monetary accommodation and fiscal stimulus has failed to spur
sustainable domestic demand so far. in china, growth in q4 of 2015 was the slowest
since 2009, pulled down by manufacturing, residential investment and exports. eme
commodity exporters confront recessionary conditions, falling currencies, sluggish
exports and still high inflation relative to their recent histories.

2
3.
the december calm in global financial markets – suggesting that the
normalisation of us monetary policy was fully anticipated – was dispelled in january
2016 by fears of further weakening of the chinese economy and the depreciation of
the renminbi. capital outflows from china triggered sell-offs across aes and emes,
exacerbating currency declines and heightening volatility. crude oil prices fell below
us $ 30 per barrel – a 12-year low –on expectations of iran adding to the supply glut.
prices of gold prices and us treasuries hardened on safe haven demand. financial
markets remain vulnerable to bouts of volatility and capital outflows from emes as an
asset class. bearish commodity price dynamics are also likely to impact investor
sentiment.
4.
on the domestic front, economic activity lost momentum in q3 of 2015-16,
pulled down by slackening agricultural and industrial growth. the north-east monsoon
season ended in december with a deficiency of 23 per cent relative to the long period
average (lpa). by end-january, rabi sowing was mildly deficient relative to a year
ago, as well as to the quinquennial average in respect of all crops, except coarse
cereals. rural incomes will continue to be supported by allied activities such as dairy
and horticulture, which now contribute as much to gdp as food grains.
5.
in the first two months of q3 of 2015-16, industrial activity slowed in relation to
the preceding quarter. this mainly reflects weak investment demand with some
deceleration of capital goods production. stalled projects continue to remain high,
and there is a decline in new investment intentions, perhaps on the back of low
capacity utilization. while revenue growth in manufacturing has been modest, the fall
in costs, partly because of a decline in commodity prices, and partly because of
improvements in manufacturing efficiency, have resulted in relatively stronger
profitability. the reserve bank’s industrial outlook survey suggests a modest
expansion of activity likely in q4. in january 2016, the manufacturing purchasing
managers’ index (pmi) expanded to a four-month high on, inter alia, resumption of
output by firms affected by the december floods as well as on new domestic and
export orders.
6.
lead indicators of the services sector are mixed. construction activity is still
tepid, as evidenced by weak growth in cement production, though the pick-up in road
construction bodes well for future activity, especially if supported by construction in
the major proposed industrial corridors. railway freight growth is still weak, though it
may reflect lower transport needs for inputs like coal, and competition from roadways.
however, the services pmi rose to a ten-month high in december on improvement in
new business orders and upbeat expectations.
7.
retail inflation measured by the consumer price index (cpi) rose for the fifth
month in december across all constituent categories. while the upturn in december
essentially reflected unfavourable base effects, the ongoing seasonal decline in
prices of fruits and vegetables could temper headline inflation in the near-term. prices
of cereals recorded modest increases despite the adverse monsoon, indicative of
effective supply management. on the other hand, pulses inflation continued to
remain elevated, reflecting structural mismatches.
8.
cpi inflation excluding food and fuel rose for the fourth successive month.
excluding petrol and diesel from this category, inflation remained flat. a breakdown
into goods and services categories shows that while goods inflation declined,
services inflation has been sticky since september 2015 across housing, transport
and communication, medical and other services. household inflation expectations

3
remain elevated and the rate of increase in corporate staff costs picked up. on the
other hand, rural wage growth has been muted.
9.
liquidity conditions tightened in the second half of december with advance tax
outflows. tightness spilled over into january 2016 on the back of a seasonal pick-up
in demand for currency, restrained spending by the government and a pick-up in
bank credit growth, in relation to deposit mobilisation. in order to mitigate these
conditions, the reserve bank injected liquidity through variable rate term repos of
varying tenors ranging from overnight to 56 days, besides provision through the
regular liquidity windows. the average daily liquidity injection (including variable rate
overnight and term repos) increased from
1,200 billion in december to about
1,345 billion in january. in addition, the reserve bank also injected
200 billion
through open market purchase operations on december 7 and january 20. in
response, money market rates remained close to the policy rate with a marginal
downside bias. bank credit in the form of personal loans and non-bank flows from
both domestic and foreign sources grew strongly.
10.
india’s exports remained in contraction mode for the thirteenth successive
month in december, although there are indications of a sequential bottoming out. in
volume terms too, the rate of decline appears to be moderating. while softer
petroleum, oil and lubricants (pol) and commodity prices helped to contain the trade
deficit, these benign effects were offset by a spike in the quantum of gold and pol
imports. as a consequence, the trade deficit widened during december in relation to
preceding months, though the overall current account deficit is likely to remain well
contained and easily financed. net foreign direct investment (fdi) and non-resident
deposits have remained robust in relation to last year. the persisting decline in oil
prices may, however, impact the flow of remittances from the gulf region where fiscal
positions are deteriorating rapidly. portfolio investment also recorded some outflows
since november. nevertheless, as on january 22, 2016, foreign exchange reserves
stood at us$ 347.6 billion – an accretion of us$ 5.9 billion during the current
financial year so far.
policy stance and rationale
11.
inflation has evolved closely along the trajectory set by the monetary policy
stance. with unfavourable base effects on the ebb and benign prices of fruits and
vegetables and crude oil, the january 2016 target of 6 per cent should be met. going
forward, under the assumption of a normal monsoon and the current level of
international crude oil prices and exchange rates, inflation is expected to be inertial
and be around 5 per cent by the end of fiscal 2016-17 (chart 1). however, the
implementation of the vii central pay commission award, which has not been
factored into these projections, will impart upward momentum to this trajectory for a
period of one to two years. the reserve bank will adjust the forecast path as and
when more clarity emerges on the timing of implementation. vagaries in the spatial
and temporal distribution of the monsoon and the impact of adverse geo-political
events on commodity prices and financial markets add additional uncertainty to the
baseline.

4

12.
prospects for the rabi harvest are improving slowly. the near-term outlook for
industrial activity may be constrained by adverse base effects in q4 and still weak
exports, although the pick-up in corporate profitability on the back of declining input
costs may provide an offset. some categories of services are likely to gain
momentum on expectations of higher activity in coming months, though the
aggregate state of activity remains muted. on balance, therefore, gva growth for
2015-16 is kept unchanged at 7.4 per cent with a downside bias.
13.
for 2016-17, growth is expected to strengthen gradually, notwithstanding
significant headwinds. expectations of a normal monsoon after two consecutive
years of rainfall deficiency, the large positive terms of trade gain, improving real
incomes of households and lower input costs of firms should contribute to
strengthening the growth momentum. yet, still weak domestic private investment
demand in a phase of balance sheet adjustments, re-emergence of concerns
relating to stalled projects, excess capacity in industry, sluggish external demand
conditions dampening export growth could act as headwinds. based on an
assessment of the balance of risks, gva growth for 2016-17 is projected at 7.6 per
cent (chart 2).

5
14.
in keeping with the government’s start-up india initiative, the reserve bank
will take steps to ease doing business and contribute to an ecosystem that is
conducive for growth of start-ups. these measures will create an enabling framework
for receiving foreign venture capital, differing contractual structures embedded in
investment instruments, deferring receipt of considerations for transfer of ownership,
facilities for escrow arrangements and simplification of documentation and reporting
procedures. a detailed statement is being issued separately.
15.
the current momentum of growth is reasonable, though below what should be
expected over the medium term. underlying growth drivers need to be rekindled to
place the economy durably on a higher growth trajectory. the revival of private
investment, in particular, has a crucial role, especially as the climate for business
improves and fiscal policy continues to consolidate. the indian economy is currently
being viewed as a beacon of stability because of the steady disinflation, a modest
current account deficit and commitment to fiscal rectitude. this needs to be
maintained so that the foundations of stable and sustainable growth are
strengthened. the reserve bank continues to be accommodative even as it leaves
the policy rate unchanged in this review, while awaiting further data on the
development of inflation. structural reforms in the forthcoming union budget that
boost growth while controlling spending will create more space for monetary policy to
support growth, while also ensuring that inflation remains on the projected path of 5
per cent by the end of 2016-17.
16.
the first bi-monthly monetary policy statement for 2016-17 will be announced
on tuesday, april 5, 2016.

press release : 2015-2016/1807

alpana killawala
principal adviser

