प्रेस प्रकाशनी press release

भारतीय ररज़िव बैंक
संचार विभाग, केंद्रीय कायाालय, एस.बी.एस.मार्ा, मुंबई-400001
_____________________________________________________________________________________________________________________

department of communication, central office, s.b.s.marg, mumbai-400001
फोन/phone: 91 22 2266 0502 फैक्स/fax: 91 22 22660358

reserve bank of india

: www.rbi.org.in/hindi
website : www.rbi.org.in
इ-मेल email: helpdoc@rbi.org.in
वेबसाइट

april 07, 2015
first bi-monthly monetary policy statement, 2015-16 by
dr. raghuram g. rajan, governor
monetary and liquidity measures
on the basis of an assessment of the current and evolving macroeconomic
situation, it has been decided to:
 keep the policy repo rate under the liquidity adjustment facility (laf)
unchanged at 7.5 per cent;


keep the cash reserve ratio (crr) of scheduled banks unchanged at 4.0 per
cent of net demand and time liability (ndtl); and



continue to provide liquidity under overnight repos at 0.25 per cent of bankwise ndtl at the laf repo rate and liquidity under 7-day and 14-day term
repos of up to 0.75 per cent of ndtl of the banking system through auctions;
and



continue with daily variable rate repos and reverse repos to smooth liquidity.

consequently, the reverse repo rate under the laf will remain unchanged at 6.5 per
cent, and the marginal standing facility (msf) rate and the bank rate at 8.5 per cent.
assessment
2.
since 2014-15’s sixth bi-monthly monetary policy statement of february, a
moderate and uneven global recovery is emerging, with economies being buffeted (or
supported) by currency fluctuations and commodity prices. growth in the united
states is likely to have been weak in the first quarter of calendar 2015, partly
because of us dollar appreciation, but is expected to strengthen. the euro area has
started to show modest improvement, supported by a boost to demand from lower
crude prices and the depreciation of the euro as well as easing financial and credit
conditions following the commencement of quantitative easing. with the waning of
the impact of the consumption tax increase, growth turned positive in japan in q4 of
2014 and consumer confidence and exports picked up. however, retail sales and
industrial production contracted, indicating that the outlook is still weak. growth
continues to slow in china amidst financial fragilities and macroeconomic
imbalances. this will have regional and global ramifications, although the softness in
international commodity prices is providing some offset for net importers while
adversely impacting net exporters. global growth is likely to firm up through 2015
and 2016, supported by stronger recovery in the advanced economies (aes) and soft
energy prices. downside risks mainly emanate from the slowdown in china,
geopolitical risks surrounding oil prices and the uneven effects of currency and
commodity price movements.

2
3.
global financial markets have been boosted by expectations of normalisation of
us monetary policy being pushed back into late 2015, monetary policy stances
turning highly accommodative in other aes, and several emerging market economies
(emes) easing policy rates to address growth concerns. long-term yields have
declined to all-time lows on weak inflation expectations, compression of term
premiums and the safe haven allure of us treasuries. ultra low interest rates and
reduction in risk premia have raised most asset prices to record highs, and have
pushed investors to riskier assets such as equity and lower rated debt instruments.
exchange rates have experienced large and volatile movements, with the us dollar
strengthening against most currencies. among emes, markets have tended to
discriminate against those with relatively weaker fundamentals and/or oil exporters.
nevertheless, with high portfolio flows to emes, risks from sudden shifts in market
sentiment have increased.
4.
domestic economic activity is likely to have strengthened in q4. second
advance estimates of the ministry of agriculture suggest that the contraction in food
grains production in 2014-15 may turn out to be less than earlier anticipated.
however, the adverse impact of unseasonal rains and hailstorms in march is still
unfolding. initial estimates indicate that as much as 17 per cent of the sown area
under the rabi crop may have been affected though the precise extent of the damage
remains to be determined. the growth in allied activities is likely to remain strong as
in the recent past, though it remains to be seen whether it will fully compensate the
decline in food grains output.
5.
the industrial sector, and in particular, manufacturing appears to be regaining
momentum, with the growth of production in positive territory for three consecutive
months till january. while basic goods production has been expanding steadily since
november 2013, capital goods output has been relatively lumpy and volatile, and
more positive readings are needed to be confident about a durable pick-up in
investment demand. the persisting contraction in consumer durables production for
over two years could be reflecting the underlying weakness in consumption demand
as well as higher imports.
6.
mixed signals are coming from the service sector. while the national accounts
statistics seem to suggest that consumption demand for services is robust relative to
the demand for goods, and purchasing managers perceive activity expanding on new
orders, various coincident indicators of services sector activity including railway and
port traffic, domestic and international passenger traffic, international freight traffic,
tourist arrivals, motorcycle and tractor sales as well as bank credit and deposit
growth remain subdued.
7.
retail inflation measured by the year-on-year changes in the revised consumer
price index (cpi) firmed up for the third successive month in february as favourable
base effects dissipated, despite the price index remaining virtually flat since
december. the still elevated levels of prices of protein-rich items such as pulses,
meat, fish and milk kept food inflation from following the seasonal decline in prices of
vegetables and fruits. the prices of items such as sugar and edible oil moderated in

3
consonance with the downturn in global commodity prices. fuel inflation edged up for
the second month in a row due to the increase in prices of electricity and firewood.
8.
inflation excluding food and fuel fell successively in the nine months till
february. a large part of this disinflation has been on account of the slump in
international crude oil prices feeding through into domestic prices of petrol and diesel
that are included under the category transport and communication. inflation in
respect of housing has also eased in the revised cpi, in part reflecting
methodological and coverage improvements. furthermore, upside pressures
affecting prices of services such as education, health and other services have also
fallen on account of weak demand conditions. the rate of growth of rural wages has
come off substantially from the double digit levels that prevailed up to november
2013. firms are also reporting a substantial easing of input price pressures, barring
the most recent purchasing manager surveys. reflecting past disinflation, inflation
expectations of households are in single digits, although they too exhibit some firming
up in q4 in response to the turning up of food and fuel inflation during januaryfebruary.
9.
since the shift in the monetary policy stance in january towards
accommodation, the reserve bank has moved to ensure comfortable liquidity
conditions through pro-active liquidity management, including fine-tuning operations
on week days and access to the msf and fixed rate reverse repo on saturdays. this
has helped to smooth the liquidity frictions that characterise events such as advance
tax payments and balance sheet dates, keeping the money market rates anchored to
the repo rate. in order to alleviate the pressures that build up in march on account of
frictional factors, the reserve bank augmented its liquidity management instruments
by engaging in repos of maturities ranging from 8 to 28 days cumulating to an
outstanding amount of `1430 billion (including support from the msf of `416 billion)
at end-march in addition to regular 14-day term repo auctions and fixed rate
overnight repos. the availability of liquidity can be gauged from the fact that in
march, average daily liquidity returned by market participations through variable/fixed
rate reverse repos amounted to `293 billion.
10. export performance has been progressively weakening and contraction set in
on both non-oil and petroleum product exports since december 2014. fragile
external demand conditions and the softness in international commodity prices have
taken a heavy toll, as in several other emes in asia. in particular, price realisations
have been eroded, despite export volumes going up. with the indian rupee gaining in
real effective terms, export margins are coming under pressure for those exporters
without substantial imported inputs. net terms of trade gains and compression in
imports of petroleum products have narrowed the trade deficit in the last three
months to its lowest level since 2009-10. gold imports remained contained; although
non-oil non-gold imports grew at a modest pace in these months, they may be
reflecting substitution effects in view of the sluggishness in domestic manufacturing.
11.
exports of services, particularly, software and travel have provided a silver
lining and have helped to hold down the current account deficit (cad) which has
narrowed in q3. this improvement has likely extended into q4. as a result, capital

4
inflows – mainly portfolio flows into domestic debt and equity markets and foreign
direct investment – have exceeded the external financing requirement and enabled
accretion to the foreign exchange reserves which reached an all-time peak of us$
343 billion as on april 3, 2015. these reserves, including forward purchases that will
be delivered over the next few months, provide some buffer against potential capital
outflows when monetary policy normalisation in aes commences. good
macroeconomic policy will, of course, be the critical first line of defence in retaining
investor confidence.
policy stance and rationale
12. in 2015 so far, the inflation path has evolved along the projected path after a
sizable undershoot of the january 2015 target. cpi inflation is projected at its current
levels in the first quarter of 2015-16, moderating thereafter to around 4 per cent by
august but firming up to reach 5.8 per cent by the end of the year (chart 1). there
are upside risks to the central projection emanating from possible intensification of el
niño conditions leading to a less than normal monsoon; large deviations in vegetable
and fruit prices from their regular seasonal patterns, given unseasonal rains; larger
than anticipated administered price revisions; faster closing of the output gap; geopolitical developments leading to hardening of global commodity prices; and spillover
from external developments through exchange rate and asset price channels.
however, at this juncture, these upside risks appear to be offset by downsides
originating from global deflationary/disinflationary tendencies, the still soft outlook on
global commodity prices; and slack in the domestic economy.

13. transmission of policy rates to lending rates has not taken place so far despite
weak credit off take and the front loading of two rate cuts. with little transmission, and
the possibility that incoming data will provide more clarity on the balance of risks on
inflation, the reserve bank will maintain status quo in its monetary policy stance in
this review.
14. the monetary policy framework agreement signed by the government of india
and the reserve bank in february 2015 will shape the stance of monetary policy in
2015-16 and succeeding years. the reserve bank will stay focussed on ensuring

5
that the economy disinflates gradually and durably, with cpi inflation targeted at 6
per cent by january 2016 and at 4 per cent by the end of 2017-18. although the
target for end-2017-18 and thereafter is defined in terms of a tolerance band of +/- 2
per cent around the mid-point, it will be the reserve bank’s endeavour to keep
inflation at or close to this mid-point, with the extended period provided for achieving
the mid-point mitigating potentially adverse effects on the economy. as outlined
above, several favourable forces are at work, consistent with the change in the
monetary policy stance towards accommodation effected from january. the reserve
bank’s intent is to allow the disinflationary momentum to spread through the
economy, but remain vigilant about any resurgence of inflationary pressures that may
destabilise the progress towards the inflation objectives set in the agreement.
15. the outlook for growth is improving gradually. comfortable liquidity conditions
should enable banks to transmit the recent reductions in the policy rate into their
lending rates, thereby improving financing conditions for the productive sectors of the
economy. along with initiatives announced in the union budget to boost investment
in infrastructure and to improve the business environment, these factors should
provide confidence to private investment and, together with the conducive outlook on
inflation, deliver real income gains to consumers and lower input cost advantages to
corporates. gdp growth estimates of the cso for 2014-15 already project a robust
pick-up, but leading and coincident indicators suggest a downward revision of these
estimates when fuller information on real activity for the last quarter becomes
available. uncertainty surrounding the arrival and distribution of the monsoon and
unanticipated global developments are the two major risks to baseline growth
projections. assuming a normal monsoon, continuation of the cyclical upturn in a
supportive policy environment, and no major structural change or supply shocks,
output growth for 2015-16 is projected at 7.8 per cent, higher by 30 bps from 7.5 per
cent in 2014-15, but with a downward bias to reflect the still subdued indicators of
economic activity (chart 2).

16.
going forward, the accommodative stance of monetary policy will be
maintained, but monetary policy actions will be conditioned by incoming data. first,
the reserve bank will await the transmission by banks of its front-loaded rate

6
reductions in january and february into their lending rates. second, developments in
sectoral prices, especially those of food, will be monitored, as will the effects of
recent weather disturbances and the likely strength of the monsoon, as the reserve
bank stays vigilant to any threats to the disinflation that is underway. the reserve
bank will look through both seasonal as well as base effects. third, the reserve
bank will look to a continuation and even acceleration of policy efforts to unclog the
supply response so as to make available key inputs such as power and land. further
progress on repurposing of public spending from poorly targeted subsidies towards
public investment and on reducing the pipeline of stalled investment will also be
helpful in containing supply constraints and creating room for monetary
accommodation. finally, the reserve bank will watch for signs of normalisation of the
us monetary policy, though it anticipates india is better buffered against likely
volatility than in the past.
part b: developmental and regulatory policies
17. this part of the statement reviews the progress on various developmental and
regulatory policy measures announced by the reserve bank in recent policy
statements and also sets out new measures to be taken for strengthening the
banking structure; broadening and deepening financial markets and extending the
reach of financial services to all.
i. monetary policy framework
18.
steps taken to revise the monetary policy framework are documented in the
accompanying monetary policy report.
ii. banking structure
19. the basel committee on banking supervision issued the final rules on the net
stable funding ratio (nsfr) in october 2014. the reserve bank has already
started phasing in implementation of the liquidity coverage ratio (lcr) from
january 2015 and is committed to the scheduled implementation of nsfr from
january 1, 2018 for banks in india. the reserve bank proposes to issue draft
guidelines on nsfr by may 15, 2015.
20. guidelines on countercyclical capital buffers (cccb) were issued on february
5, 2015. they advised that the cccb would be activated as and when circumstances
warrant, and that the decision would normally be pre-announced with a lead time of
four quarters. the framework envisages the credit-to-gdp gap as the main indicator
which may be used in conjunction with other supplementary indicators such as the
incremental credit-deposit (c-d) ratio for a moving period of three years, the
industrial outlook survey (ios) assessment index and the interest coverage ratio. a
review and empirical testing of these indicators was carried out to assess whether
activation of the cccb is warranted. it was concluded that the overall situation does
not warrant imposition of cccb at this point of time.

7
21.
in july 2014, banks were allowed to issue long term bonds (ltbs), with
exemptions from certain regulatory pre-emptions, for lending to (i) long-term projects
in infrastructure sub-sectors, and (ii) affordable housing. however, cross-holding of
such bonds amongst banks is currently not permitted. on a review, it has been
decided to allow banks to invest in such bonds issued by other banks, subject to the
following conditions:
i) banks’ investment in these bonds will not be treated as ‘assets with the
banking system in india’ for the purpose of calculation of ndtl; and
ii) any single bank’s holding of bonds in a particular issue will be subject to
certain limits in relation to the bond issue size. its aggregate holding of such
bonds will also be subject to certain limits in relation to its own assets.
iii) ltbs held for trading will reduce the bank’s priority sector and liquidity benefits
obtained from its own issuance of ltbs.
detailed guidelines in this regard will be issued shortly.
22. for monetary transmission to occur, lending rates have to be sensitive to the
policy rate. with the introduction of the base rate on july 1, 2010 banks could set
their actual lending rates on loans and advances with reference to the base rate. at
present, banks are following different methodologies in computing their base rate –
on the basis of average cost of funds, marginal cost of funds or blended cost of funds
(liabilities). base rates based on marginal cost of funds should be more sensitive to
changes in the policy rates. in order to improve the efficiency of monetary policy
transmission, the reserve bank will encourage banks to move in a time-bound
manner to marginal-cost-of-funds-based determination of their base rate. detailed
guidelines will be issued shortly.
23. the financial benchmarks india pvt. ltd., jointly floated by the fixed income
money market and derivatives association of india (fimmda), the foreign exchange
dealers' association of india (fedai) and the indian banks’ association (iba), has
been established as an independent benchmark administrator. this administrator will
start operations by end-may 2015. once it starts publishing various indices of market
interest rates, the reserve bank will explore the possibility of encouraging banks to
use the indices as an external benchmark for pricing bank products.
24.
the reserve bank has been prescribing a comprehensive ‘calendar of
reviews’ to be deliberated by the boards of banks, with significant additions to the
calendar over the years. time spent on reviews reduces the leeway for the board to
discuss issues of strategic importance for banks such as product market strategy and
risk management. the committee to review governance of boards of banks in india
(chairman: dr. p.j.nayak) recommended that discussions in the boards of banks
need to be upgraded and greater focus should be on strategic issues. it is, therefore,
proposed to do away with the mandatory calendar of reviews and instead, replace it
with the seven critical themes prescribed by the nayak committee namely, business
strategy, financial reports and their integrity, risk, compliance, customer protection,
financial inclusion and human resources, and leave it to the banks’ boards to
determine other list of items to be deliberated and periodicity thereof.

8
25. the need to bring in professionalism to the boards of banks cannot be
overemphasized. in order to attract and retain professional directors, it is essential
that they are appropriately compensated. public sector banks follow guidelines
issued by the government in this regard. the remuneration of the part-time chairmen
of private sector banks are approved specifically for each bank under the current
statutory provisions. however, there is no guidance on remuneration to other nonexecutive directors of private sector banks. therefore, it is proposed:
i) to issue guidelines to private sector banks on a policy on remuneration for the
non-executive directors (other than part-time chairman) that will reflect
market realities and will be within the parameters specified in the banking
regulation act 1949 and the companies act, 2013; and
ii) to discuss with the government the adoption of a similar remuneration policy
for the non-executive directors of the public sector banks.
26. with a view to enlarging the scope of urban co-operative banks for expanding
their business, it has been decided to allow financially sound and well managed
(fswm) scheduled urban co-operative banks, which are cbs-enabled and having
minimum net worth of `100 crore, to issue credit cards. detailed guidelines in this
regard will be issued separately.
27. similarly, with a view to providing greater freedom to state co-operative banks to
expand their business and to provide technology-enabled services to their customers,
it has been decided to permit state co-operative banks satisfying certain eligibility
criteria to set up off-site atms/mobile atms without obtaining prior approval from the
reserve bank. detailed guidelines in this regard will be issued separately.
iii. financial markets
28. several steps have been taken by the reserve bank to promote liquidity in the
government securities (g-sec) market as recommended by the working group on
enhancing liquidity in the government securities and interest rate derivatives
markets (chairman: shri r. gandhi). these include, inter alia, a) conduct of g-sec
auctions at both uniform price and multiple price formats; b) change of the settlement
cycle of primary auctions for treasury bills (t-bills) from t+2 to t+1 basis; and c) reissuance of state development loans.
29. as part of continuing measures to promote liquidity, the reserve bank will
formulate a scheme for market making by primary dealers in semi-liquid and illiquid
government securities. details of the scheme will be worked out and implemented in
consultation with market participants within the next three months.
30. although the g-sec market is predominantly institutional in nature, the reserve
bank has initiated several steps to promote retail/individual investments, such as the
non-competitive bidding scheme, and enabling access to the negotiated dealing
system-order matching (nds-om). to increase participation of the retail and midsegment investors in the g-sec market, gilt account holders (gahs) were also
extended web-based access to nds-om (secondary market trading platform) and

9
nds-auction platform (primary market platform) earlier. auctions of g-secs have
since moved to a more robust cbs platform (e-kuber). accordingly,
i) it is now proposed to introduce a similar web-based solution for participation of
all mid-segment / retail investors having gilt accounts on the e-kuber
platform. the facility is expected to be made available within the next three
months.
ii) considering the need to tap private savings through g-secs, retail
investors/individuals could be provided direct access to both primary and
secondary market platforms without any intermediary. hence, it is proposed
to explore the creation of alternate channels of distribution (e-distribution
channels) for g-secs by the reserve bank.
iii) the reserve bank has been in consultation with all stakeholders to enable
seamless movement of securities from subsidiary general ledger (sgl) form
to demat form and vice versa to promote trading of g-secs on stock
exchanges. concomitantly, it has also been decided to provide demat
account holders a functionality to put through trades on nds-om. as
implementation of these reforms involves multiple agencies, it is proposed to
constitute an implementation group with representatives from all
stakeholders to roll out the measures within a period of six months.
iv) the non-competitive bidding facility available to retail investors is currently
applicable only to auctions of dated securities other than treasury bills. in
the case of treasury bills, a different type of non-competitive bidding is
permitted only for state governments, eligible provident funds, select foreign
central banks and sovereign wealth funds. it is proposed to allow noncompetitive bidding facility in treasury bills to individuals as well. details of
the facility will be worked out and implemented in consultation with the
government of india.
31. a few international financial institutions were permitted to issue rupee bonds in
overseas markets, subject to certain conditions. these issues have been received
with interest. the appetite for rupee debt amongst international investors is a
welcome development. in view of this, it is proposed to expand, in consultation with
the government of india, the scope of such bond issues by the international financial
institutions as also to permit indian corporates eligible to raise external commercial
borrowing (ecb) through issuance of rupee bonds in overseas centers with an
appropriate regulatory framework.
32. under the present regulatory framework governing foreign exchange derivatives
contracts under the foreign exchange management act, 1999 (fema), writing of
options by the users on a standalone basis is not permitted. however, end-users can
enter into option strategies of simultaneous buying and selling of plain vanilla
european options, provided there is no net receipt of premium. with a view to
encouraging hedging of forex exposures and enhancing the liquidity of the currency
options market, it is proposed to permit indian exporters and importers to write
covered options on the basis of actual contracted forex exposure, subject to
conditions. detailed operating instructions shall follow separately.

10

iv. access to finance
33. the reserve bank had constituted an internal working group to revisit the
priority sector guidelines. the working group has since submitted its report, which
was placed on the reserve bank’s website for comments/suggestions.the working
group has, inter alia, recommended specific sub-targets for small and marginal
farmers and micro enterprises and inclusion of certain specific types of social
infrastructure within the ambit of priority sector lending. the working group has also
recommended introduction of tradable priority sector lending certificates as another
instrument to manage deficit/surplus amongst the players within the system. the
reserve bank will take a view on the recommendations in the light of feedback
received and the guidelines in this regard will be issued shortly.
34. taking into consideration the improvement in the micro-finance institutions
(mfi) sector and recommendations of the committee on comprehensive financial
services for small businesses and low income households (chairman: dr. nachiket
mor), there is a need to revise upwards the limit relating to total indebtedness of the
borrower, eligible rural and semi-urban household annual incomes and loan amounts
to be disbursed in the first cycle and in subsequent cycles as follows:
i) total indebtedness of a borrower, excluding educational/ medical expenses,
not to exceed `1,00,000 (raised from the current limit of `50,000).
ii) loan disbursed to a borrower with a rural household annual income not
exceeding `1,00,000 (enhanced from `60,000) or urban and semi-urban
household income not exceeding `1,60,000 (enhanced from `1,20,000).
iii) disbursement of the loan amount not to exceed `60,000 (enhanced from
`35,000) in the first cycle and `1,00,000 (enhanced from `50,000) in
subsequent cycles.
detailed guidelines will be issued shortly.
35. several measures have been taken to ensure the timely flow of funds to the
infrastructure sector. one of them was to create a separate category of non-bank
finance companies (nbfcs) called nbfc-infrastructure debt fund (nbfc-idf).
these nbfcs were allowed only to provide take-out finance for infrastructure
projects in the public private partnership (ppp) segment under a tripartite agreement
involving, among others, the project authority. certain regulatory dispensations were
also given to these nbfcs. with a view to expanding the nature of projects to which
they can lend, it is proposed to allow nbfc-idfs to provide take-out finance for
infrastructure projects that have completed one year of operation in the ppp segment
without a tripartite agreement and to the non-ppp segment, subject to certain
conditions. detailed guidelines are being issued separately.
36. looking ahead, the reserve bank’s developmental and regulatory policies will
continue to be guided by the five-pillar approach to improve the efficacy of monetary
and liquidity management, expand financial inclusion and carry forward banking

11
sector reforms by adapting the best international practices to country-specific
requirements.
37. the second bi-monthly monetary policy statement will be announced on june 2,
2015; the third bi-monthly monetary policy statement on august 4, 2015; the fourth bimonthly monetary policy statement on september 29, 2015; the fifth bi-monthly
monetary policy statement on december 1, 2015; and the sixth bi-monthly monetary
policy statement on february 2, 2016.

press release : 2014-2015/2101

alpana killawala
principal chief general manager

