प्रेस प्रकाशनी press release

भारतीय ररजर्ा बैंक
संचार विभाग, केंद्रीय कायाालय, एस.बी.एस.मार्ा, मुंबई-400001
________________________________________________________________________________________________________

department of communication, central office, s.b.s.marg, mumbai-400001
फोन/phone: 91 22 2266 0502 फैक्स/fax: 91 22 2266 0358

reserve bank of india
र्ेबसाइट : www.rbi.org.in/hindi

website : www.rbi.org.in
इ-मेल email: helpdoc@rbi.org.in

december 2, 2014
fifth bi-monthly monetary policy statement, 2014-15
by dr. raghuram g rajan, governor

monetary and liquidity measures
on the basis of an assessment of the current and evolving macroeconomic
situation, it has been decided to:


keep the policy repo rate under the liquidity adjustment facility (laf)
unchanged at 8.0 per cent;



keep the cash reserve ratio (crr) of scheduled banks unchanged at 4.0 per
cent of net demand and time liabilities (ndtl);



continue to provide liquidity under overnight repos at 0.25 per cent of bankwise ndtl at the laf repo rate and liquidity under 7-day and 14-day term
repos of up to 0.75 per cent of ndtl of the banking system through auctions;
and



continue with daily one-day term repos and reverse repos to smooth liquidity.

consequently, the reverse repo rate under the laf will remain unchanged at
7.0 per cent, and the marginal standing facility (msf) rate and the bank rate at 9.0
per cent.
assessment of the global economy
2.
since the fourth bi-monthly monetary policy statement of september 2014,
the global economy has slowed, though the recent sharp fall in crude prices will
have a net positive impact on global growth. the recovery in the united states is
broadening on the back of stronger domestic consumption, rising investment and
industrial activity. in the euro area, headwinds from recessionary forces continue to
weaken industrial production and investment sentiment. in japan, growth may be
picking up again on the back of stronger exports, helped in part by further
quantitative and qualitative easing that has led to a depreciation of the yen. in
china, disappointing activity and still-low inflation have prompted rate cuts by the
people’s bank of china. in other major emerging market economies (emes),
downside risks to growth from elevated inflation, low commodity prices, deteriorating
labour market conditions and stalling domestic demand have become accentuated.
1

3.
notwithstanding the cessation of asset purchases by the us fed, financial
markets have remained generally buoyant on abundant liquidity stemming from
accommodative monetary policies in the advanced economies (aes). the search for
yield has driven global equity markets to new highs, with investors shunning gold
and commodities. capital flows to emes recovered from market turbulence in the
first half of october, although some discrimination on the basis of fundamentals is
becoming discernible.
assessment of the indian economy
4.
domestic activity weakened in q2 of 2014-15, and activity is likely to be
muted in q3 also because of a moderate kharif harvest. the deficiency in the northeast monsoon rainfall has constrained the pace of rabi sowing, except in the
southern states. despite reasonable levels of water storage in major reservoirs, the
rabi crop is unlikely to compensate for the decline in kharif production earlier in the
year and consequently, agricultural growth in 2014-15 is likely to be muted. this,
along with a slowdown in rural wage growth, is weighing on rural consumption
demand.
5.
despite the uptick in september, the growth of industrial production slumped
to 1.1 per cent in q2 with negative momentum in september, unable to sustain the
improvement recorded in the preceding quarter. the persisting contraction in the
production of both capital goods and consumer goods in q2 reflected weak
aggregate domestic demand. however, more recent readings of core sector activity,
automobile sales and purchasing managers’ indices suggest improvement in likely
activity. exports have buffered the slowdown in industrial activity in q2 but, going
forward, require support from partner country growth.
6.
in the services sector, the october’s purchasing managers’ survey indicates
deceleration in new business. in contrast, tourist arrivals and domestic and
international cargo movements have shown improvement. thus, various
constituents of the services sector are emitting mixed signals.
7.
a rise in investment is critical for a sustained pick-up in overall economic
activity. while low capacity utilisation in some sectors is a dampener, the recent
strong improvement in business confidence and in investment intentions should
help. in this context, the still slow pace of reviving stalled projects, despite
government efforts, warrants policy priority, even as ongoing efforts to ease stress in
the financial system unlock resources for financing the envisaged investment push.
8.
the fiscal outlook should brighten because of the fall in crude prices, but
weak tax revenue growth and the slow pace of disinvestment suggest some
uncertainty about the likely achievement of fiscal targets, and the quality of eventual
fiscal adjustment. the government, however, appears determined to stay on course.
9.
retail inflation, as measured by the consumer price index (cpi), has
decelerated sharply since the fourth bi-monthly statement of september. this
reflects, to some extent, transitory factors such as favourable base effects and the
usual softening of fruits and vegetable prices that occurs at this time of the year. on
the other hand, protein-rich items such as milk and pulses continue to experience
upside pressures, reflecting structural mismatches in supply and demand. the
absence of adequate administered price revisions in inputs like electricity has
contributed to the easing of inflation in the fuel group.
10.
in the non-food non-fuel category, inflation eased broadly in september.
further softening of international crude prices in october eased price pressures in
2

transport and communication. however, upside pressures persist in respect of
prices of clothing and bedding, housing and other miscellaneous services, resulting
in non-food non-fuel inflation for october remaining flat at its level in the previous
month, and above headline inflation. survey-based inflationary expectations have
been coming down with the fall in prices of commonly-bought items such as
vegetables, but are still in the low double digits. administered price corrections, as
and when they are effected, weaker-than-anticipated agricultural production, and a
possible rise in energy prices on the back of geo-political risks could alter the
currently benign inflation outlook significantly.
11.
liquidity conditions have eased considerably in q3 of 2014-15 due to
structural and frictional factors, as well as the fine tuning of the liquidity adjustment
framework. with deposit mobilisation outpacing credit growth and currency demand
remaining subdued in relation to past trends, banks are flush with funds, leading a
number of banks to reduce deposit rates. the main frictional source of liquidity has
been the large release of expenditure/transfers by the government. in view of
abundant liquidity, banks’ recourse to the reserve bank for liquidity through net
fixed and variable rate term and overnight repos and msf declined from `803
billion, on average, in q1 to `706 billion in q2 and further to `476 billion in octobernovember. the use of export credit refinance also declined from 52.6 per cent of the
limit in q2 to 32.6 per cent in october-november. the revised liquidity management
framework introduced in september, has helped the weighted average cut-off rates
in the 14-day term repo auctions as well as in the overnight variable rate repo
auctions to remain close to the repo rate, and the volatility of the weighted average
call rate has fallen, apart from episodes of cash build-up ahead of diwali holidays.
12.
the reserve bank determines the need for open market operations (omo)
based on its assessment of monetary conditions rather than on a specific view on
long term yields. on an assessment of the permanent liquidity conditions, the
reserve bank conducted omo sales worth `401 billion during october to december
so far.
13.
merchandise exports declined in october, mainly reflecting sluggish external
demand conditions, but also the softening of international prices resulting in lower
realisations. for the period april-october as a whole, however, export growth
remained positive although the deceleration since july requires vigilance. with
import growth remaining modest on account of the decline in pol imports due to
falling crude prices, the trade deficit narrowed from its level a year ago. gold
imports have surged since september in volume terms, largely reflecting seasonal
demand. barring month-to-month variations, non-oil non-gold import growth has
remained moderate, with anecdotal evidence of imports substituting for shortfalls in
domestic production. even as external financing requirements stay moderate, all
categories of capital flows, except non-resident deposits, have been buoyant. the
consequent accretion to reserves denominated in us dollars has been moderated
by valuation effects resulting from the strength of the us dollar.

policy stance and rationale
14.
consistent with the balance of risks set out in the fourth bi-monthly monetary
policy statement of september, headline inflation has been receding steadily and
current readings are below the january 2015 target of 8 per cent as well as the
january 2016 target of 6 per cent. the inflation reading for november – which will
3

become available by mid-december – is expected to show a further softening.
thereafter, however, the favourable base effect that is driving down headline
inflation will likely dissipate and inflation for december (data release in midjanuary) may well rise above current levels.
15.
the key uncertainty is the durability of this upturn. the full outcome of the
north-east monsoon will determine the intensity of price pressures relating to
cereals, oilseeds and pulses, but it is reasonable to expect some firming up of
these prices in view of the monsoon’s performance so far and the shortfall
estimated for kharif production. risks from imported inflation appear to be
retreating, given the softening of international commodity prices, especially crude,
and reasonable stability in the foreign exchange market. accordingly, the central
forecast for cpi inflation is revised down to 6 per cent for march 2015 (chart 1).

16.
turning to the outlook for inflation in the medium-term, projections at this
stage will be contingent upon expectations of a normal south-west monsoon in
2015, international crude prices broadly around current levels and no change in
administered prices in the fuel group, barring electricity. over the next 12-month
period, inflation is expected to retain some momentum and hover around 6 per cent,
except for seasonal movements, as the disinflation momentum works through.
accordingly, the risks to the january 2016 target of 6 per cent appear evenly
balanced under the current policy stance.
17.
some easing of monetary conditions has already taken place. the weighted
average call rates as well as long term yields for government and high-quality
corporate issuances have moderated substantially since end-august. however,
these interest rate impulses have yet to be transmitted by banks into lower lending
rates. indeed, slow bank credit growth is mirrored by increasing reliance of large
corporations on commercial paper and domestic as well as external public
issuances.
18.
still weak demand and the rapid pace of recent disinflation are factors
supporting monetary accommodation. however, the weak transmission by banks of
the recent fall in money market rates into lending rates suggests monetary policy
shifts will primarily have signaling effects for a while. nevertheless, these signaling
4

effects are likely to be large because the reserve bank has repeatedly indicated
that once the monetary policy stance shifts, subsequent policy actions will be
consistent with the changed stance. there is still some uncertainty about the
evolution of base effects in inflation, the strength of the on-going disinflationary
impulses, the pace of change of the public’s inflationary expectations, as well as the
success of the government’s efforts to hit deficit targets. a change in the monetary
policy stance at the current juncture is premature. however, if the current inflation
momentum and changes in inflationary expectations continue, and fiscal
developments are encouraging, a change in the monetary policy stance is likely
early next year, including outside the policy review cycle.
19.
while activity appears to have lost some momentum in q2, probably
extending into q3, conditions congenial for a turnaround – the softening of inflation;
easing of commodity prices and input costs; comfortable liquidity conditions; and
rising business confidence as well as purchasing activity – are gathering. these
conditions could enable a pick-up in q4 if coordinated policy efforts fructify in
dispelling the drag on the economy emanating from structural constraints. a durable
revival of investment demand continues to be held back by infrastructural
constraints and lack of assured supply of key inputs, in particular coal, power, land
and minerals. the success of ongoing government actions in these areas will be key
to reviving growth and offsetting downside risks emanating from agriculture – in view
of weaker-than-expected rabi sowing – and exports – given the sluggishness in
external demand. anticipating such success, the central estimate of projected
growth for 2014-15 has been retained at 5.5 per cent, with a gradual pick-up in
momentum through 2015-16 on the assumption of a normal monsoon and no
adverse supply/financial shocks (chart 2).

20.
the sixth bi-monthly monetary policy statement is scheduled on tuesday,
february 3, 2015.

alpana killawala
principal chief general manager

press release: 2014-15/1124
5

