reserve bank of india

third quarter review of
monetary policy 2009-10

dr. d. subbarao
governor

january 29, 2010
mumbai

contents
page no.

i.

the state of the economy ........................................................................1
global economy ....................................................................................1
domestic economy................................................................................. 2

ii.

outlook and projections ...........................................................................4
global outlook........................................................................................ 4
domestic outlook ................................................................................... 5
risk factors ............................................................................................ 7

iii. the policy stance .......................................................................................9
iv.

monetary measures

10

reserve bank of india
third quarter review of monetary policy 2009-10
by
dr. d. subbarao
governor
this policy review statement should be read and understood together
with the detailed review in macroeconomic and monetary developments
released yesterday by the reserve bank. the statement is organised in four
sections. section i provides an overview of global and domestic
macroeconomic developments; section ii sets out the outlook and projections
for growth, inflation, money and credit aggregates. section iii explains the
stance of monetary policy and section iv specifies the monetary measures.
i. the state of the economy
global economy
2.
the global economy is showing increasing signs of stabilisation. the
growth outlook in virtually all economies is being revised upwards steadily,
with the asian region experiencing a relatively stronger rebound. global
trade is gradually picking up, but other indicators of economic activity,
particularly capital flows and asset and commodity prices are more buoyant.
however, even as most of the forecasts on recovery are generally optimistic,
significant risks remain. the recovery in many economies is driven largely
by government spending, with the private sector yet to begin playing a
significant part. there are signs that high levels of global liquidity are
contributing to rising asset prices as well as rising commodity prices.
emerging market economies (emes) are generally recovering faster than
advanced economies. but they are also likely to face increased inflationary
pressures due to easy liquidity conditions resulting from large capital
inflows.
3.
while conditions in the beginning of 2010 are significantly better than
they were at the beginning of 2009, a different set of policy challenges has
emerged for both advanced economies and emes. in 2009, while advanced
economies were focused on dealing with the financial crisis, especially
reviving the credit market and restoring the health of the financial sector,
emes were engaged in mitigating the adverse impact of the global financial
crisis on their real economies. in 2010, the effort in advanced economies will
be to further improve the financing conditions and strengthen the growth
impulses, while the endeavour in the emes will be to strengthen the recovery
process without compromising on price stability and to contain asset price
inflation stemming from large capital inflows.

domestic economy
4.
as stated in the second quarter review of october 2009, india's
macroeconomic context is different from that of advanced and other emes in
at least four respects. one, india is facing rising inflationary pressures, albeit
largely due to supply side factors. two, households, firms and financial
institutions in india continue to have strong balance sheets, although there is
a need to encourage domestic consumption and investment demand. three,
since the indian economy is supply-constrained, pick-up in demand could
exacerbate inflationary pressures. four, india is one of the few large emes
with twin deficits - fiscal deficit and current account deficit.
5.
growth during q2 of 2009-10, at 7.9 per cent, reveals a degree of
resilience that surprised many. subsequent data releases, whether on
industrial production, infrastructure or exports, confirm the assessment that
the economy is steadily gaining momentum. based on this better-thanexpected performance, growth forecasts for 2009-10 have generally been
revised upwards. as reassuring as this recovery is, it is still unbalanced.
public expenditure continues to play a dominant role and performance across
sectors is uneven, suggesting that recovery is yet to become sufficiently
broad-based.
6.
for several months, rapidly rising food inflation has been a cause for
concern. more recently, there are indications that the sustained increase in
food prices is beginning to spill over into other commodities and services as
well. the increases in the prices of manufactured goods have accelerated
over the past two months. while food products, understandably, contribute
significantly to this, pressures in other sectors are also visible. further,
prices of non-administered fuel items have increased significantly in line
with rising international prices. with growth accelerating in the second half
of 2009-10 and expected to gain momentum over the next year, capacity
constraints could potentially reinforce supply-side inflationary pressures.
7.
the inflation risk looms larger when viewed in the context of global
price movements. as already indicated, global commodity prices are showing
signs of firming up, driven both by the recovery in demand and the asset
motive. significantly, prices of important food items are also firming up.
going by the food and agriculture organisation (fao) data, the global rates
of increase in the prices of sugar, cereals and edible oils are now appreciably
higher than domestic rates. the opportunity to use imports as a way to
contain domestic food prices is, therefore, quite limited.
8.
monetary aggregates during 2009-10 have so far moved broadly in line
with their projections. however, non-food bank credit growth decelerated
significantly from its peak of over 29 per cent in october 2008 to a little over
10 per cent in october 2009. thereafter, it recovered to over 14 per cent by
mid-january 2010. this credit performance should be seen in the context of
improved access of corporates to non-bank sources of funds this year. rough
calculations show that the total flow of financial resources from banks,
domestic non-bank and external sources to the commercial sector during

2009-10 (up to january 15, 2010) at rs.5,89,000 crore was only marginally
lower than rs.5,95,000 crore in the corresponding period of the previous
year. these numbers suggest that non-bank sources of finance have, to a
large extent, mitigated the impact of the slow down in bank credit growth.
9.
our previous reviews have commented on the monetary transmission
during the crisis period. while the changes in the reserve bank's policy rates
were quickly transmitted to the money and government securities markets,
transmission to the credit market was slower. evidently, the transmission is
still in progress. the effective average lending rate of scheduled commercial
banks declined from 12.3 per cent in march 2008 to 11.1 per cent in march
2009. although relevant information for the subsequent period is not
available, the effective average lending rates may have declined further as
banks' benchmark prime lending rates (bplrs) softened by 25-100 basis
points during this period.
10. financial markets have remained orderly. overnight money market
rates remained below or close to the lower bound of the liquidity adjustment
facility (laf) corridor. liquidity conditions remained comfortable with the
reserve bank absorbing about rs.1,09,000 crore on a daily average basis
during the current financial year. yields on government securities could
potentially have increased sharply because of the abrupt increase in
government borrowings. however, the upward pressure on yields was
contained by lower commercial credit demand, open market operation (omo)
purchases and active liquidity management by the reserve bank. equity
markets are behaving in a manner consistent with global patterns. real estate
prices have firmed up as has been the trend in several other emes. increasing
optimism about the recovery and high levels of liquidity are driving up real
estate prices although they are still some distance away from the pre-crisis
peaks.
11. on the fiscal front, the stimulus by the government in the second half
of 2008-09 has clearly contributed significantly to the recovery. it may be
recalled that the crisis-driven stimulus by way of reduction in excise levies,
interest rate subventions and additional capital expenditure came on top of
structural measures already built into the budget such as the sixth pay
commission award and farm debt waiver.
12. we will have to await the forthcoming budget in end-february 2010 for
the government's decision on phasing out the transitory components of the
stimulus. as regards the structural components, even though they were oneoff, some of their impact is expected to continue over the next couple of
years, as state governments and public sector enterprises align their
compensation structures with the recommendations of the sixth pay
commission.
13. managing the government borrowing programme to finance the large
fiscal deficit posed a major challenge for the reserve bank. in order to
address this, the reserve bank front-loaded the government borrowing
programme, unwound mss securities and undertook omo purchases.

14.
on the external front, exports have begun responding to the revival in
global demand. right through the difficulties of 2008-09 and the early
months of the current financial year, there was never any pressure on the
current account. however, capital outflows in the third quarter of 2008-09
led to some stress on the balance of payments, but we rode this out on the
strength of our forex reserves. the reserve bank, however, had to initiate
some conventional and non-conventional measures to ease the pressure on
forex and rupee liquidity. in the space of a year, the situation has clearly
stabilised.
15. the current account deficit during april-september 2009 was us$ 18.6
billion, up from us$ 15.8 billion during april-september 2008. over the first
half of 2009-10, capital inflows resumed, but were not significantly in excess
of the current account deficit. india's improving growth prospects, combined
with persistently high levels of global liquidity, may result in a significant
increase in net inflows over the coming months. depending on how these are
handled, there will be implications in terms of a combination of exchange
rate appreciation, larger systemic liquidity and the fiscal costs of
sterilisation.
ii. outlook and projections
global outlook
global growth
16. global economic performance improved during the third and fourth
quarters of 2009, prompting the imf to reduce the projected rate of economic
contraction in 2009 from 1.1 per cent made in october 2009 to 0.8 per cent in
its latest world economic outlook (weo) update released on january 26,
2010. the imf has also revised the projection of global growth for 2010 to
3.9 per cent, up from 3.1 per cent (table 1). the imf expects the growth
performance, which will be led by major asian economies, to vary
considerably across countries and regions, reflecting different initial
conditions, external shocks, and policy responses.
table 1: projected global gdp growth (%)*
country/region
us
uk
euro area
japan
china
india
emerging and developing economies
world

2009

2010

(-) 2.5
(-) 4.8
(-) 3.9
(-) 5.3
8.7
5.6
2.1
(-)0.8

2.7
1.3
1.0
1.7
10.0
7.7
6.0
3.9

source: world economic outlook update, imf, january 26. 2010

17. the imf has also revised upwards its projection of the real gdp
growth of emerging and developing economies for 2009 to 2.1 per cent from
its earlier number of 1.7 per cent. the estimates are even more optimistic for
2010. the growth of emerging and developing economies is now projected at
6.0 per cent, up from 5.1 per cent earlier. the growth in emes such as china
and india and other emerging asian economies is expected to be robust.
commodity-producing countries are likely to recover quickly in 2010 on the
back of a rebound in commodity prices.
global inflation
18. the imf expects that the high levels of slack in resource utilisation
and stable inflation expectations will contain global inflationary pressures in
2010. in the advanced economies, headline inflation is expected to increase
from zero in 2009 to 1.3 per cent in 2010, as rising energy prices may more
than offset deceleration in wage levels. in emerging and developing
economies, inflation is expected to rise to 6.2 per cent in 2010 from 5.2 per
cent in 2009 due to low slack in resource utilisation and increased capital
inflows.
domestic outlook
growth
19. during 2009-10, real gdp growth accelerated from 6.1 per cent in q1
to
7.9 per cent in q2 driven by revival in industrial growth, and pick-up in
services sector growth, aided by payment of arrears arising out of the sixth
pay commission award. it is expected that q3 growth, which will reflect the
full impact of the deficient south-west monsoon rainfall on kharif crops,
would be lower than that of q2. as rabi prospects appear to be better, on the
whole, agricultural gdp growth in 2009-10 is expected to be near zero.
20. as a result of the improvement in the global economic situation since
the second quarter review in october 2009, exports expanded in november
2009, after contracting for 13 straight months. this positive trend is expected
to persist. the industrial sector recovery, some signs of which were noted in
the second quarter review, is now consolidating. the performance of the
corporate sector has picked up. increased business optimism also reflects
brighter prospects for the industrial sector. services sector activities have
improved. domestic and international financing conditions have eased
considerably, and this too should support domestic demand.
21. in the second quarter review of october 2009, we had placed the
baseline projection for gdp growth for 2009-10 at 6.0 per cent with an
upside bias. the movements in the latest indicators of real sector activity
indicate that the upside bias has materialised. assuming a near zero growth
in agricultural production and continued recovery in industrial production
and services sector activity, the baseline projection for gdp growth for 200910 is now raised to 7.5 per cent (chart 1).

22. looking ahead to 2010-11, our preliminary assessment of the baseline
scenario is that the current growth will be sustained. this is a tentative
assessment. we shall formally indicate our growth projection for 2010-11 in
our monetary policy in april 2010.
inflation
23. headline wholesale price index (wpi) inflation was 1.2 per cent in
march 2009. it continued to decline and became negative during june-august
2009 due to the large statistical base effect. it turned positive in september
2009, accelerated to 4.8 per cent in november 2009 and further to 7.3 per
cent in december 2009. on a financial year basis, between april-december
2009, wpi moved up by 8 per cent.
24. the deficient monsoon rainfall and drought conditions in several parts
of the country have accentuated the pressure on food prices, pushing up the
overall inflation rate – both of the wpi and consumer price indices (cpis).
going forward, the rabi crop prospects are assessed to be better. the large
stock of foodgrains with public agencies should help supply management. on
the other hand, there is a risk that inflationary pressures may emanate from
the rebound in global commodity prices.
25. assessment of inflationary pressures has become increasingly complex
in the recent period as the wpi and cpi inflation rates have shown
significant divergence. all the four cpis have remained elevated since march
2008 due to the sharp increase in essential commodity prices. the reserve
bank monitors an array of measures of inflation, both overall and
disaggregated components, in conjunction with other economic and financial
indicators to assess the underlying inflationary pressures for formulating its
monetary policy stance.

26. the second quarter review of october 2009 projected wpi inflation
of 6.5 per cent with an upside bias for end-march 2010. the upside risks in
terms of higher food prices reflecting poor monsoon have clearly
materialised. however, some additional factors have also exerted upward
pressure on wpi inflation. one, the expected seasonal moderation has not
taken place, other than in vegetables. two, prices of the non-administered
component of the fuel group, tracking the movement in global crude prices,
have also risen significantly. three, there have also been some signs of
demand side pressures. the reserve bank's quarterly inflation expectations
survey for households indicates that inflation expectations are on the rise.
keeping in view the global trend in commodity prices and the domestic
demand-supply balance, the baseline projection for wpi inflation for endmarch 2010 is now raised to 8.5 per cent (chart 2).

27. as with growth, we shall formally announce our inflation projection
for 2010-11 in our monetary policy in april 2010. however, on the
assumption of a normal monsoon and global oil prices remaining around the
current level, it is expected that inflation will moderate from july 2010. this
moderation in inflation will depend upon several factors, including the
measures taken and to be taken by the reserve bank as a part of the
normalisation process.
28. as always, the reserve bank will endeavour to ensure price stability
and anchor inflation expectations. the conduct of monetary policy will
continue to condition and contain perception of inflation in the range of 4.04.5 per cent. this will be in line with the medium-term objective of 3.0 per

cent inflation consistent with india’s broader integration with the global
economy.
money and credit aggregates
29. during the current financial year, the year-on-year growth in money
supply (m 3 ) moderated from over 20.0 per cent at the beginning of the
financial year to 16.5 per cent on january 15, 2010, reflecting deceleration in
bank credit growth during 2009-10. year-on-year increase in non-food bank
credit to the commercial sector, at 14.4 per cent as on january 15, 2010, was
significantly lower than the 22.0 per cent growth a year ago. consequently,
the more important source of m 3 expansion this year has been bank credit to
the government, reflecting the enlarged support to the market borrowing of
the government and unwinding of mss securities.
30. aided by the measures initiated by the reserve bank (see para 13),
over 98 per cent of the net market borrowing programme of the central
government for 2009-10 has already been completed by january 28, 2010.
the anticipated increase in credit demand by the commercial sector in the
remaining period of 2009-10 can, therefore, be easily met from the market as
adequate liquidity is available in the system. in view of the increased
availability of funds from domestic non-bank and external sources (see para
8), the 18 per cent growth in adjusted non-food credit growth projected
earlier is unlikely to be realised. accordingly, the indicative adjusted nonfood credit growth projection for 2009-10 is now reduced to 16 per cent.
based on this projected credit growth and the remaining very marginal
market borrowing of the government, the projected m 3 growth in 2009-10
has been reduced to 16.5 per cent for policy purposes. consistent with this,
aggregate deposits of scheduled commercial banks are projected to grow by
17 per cent. these numbers, as before, are provided as indicative projections
and not as targets.
risk factors
31. while the baseline scenario is comforting, a number of downside risks
to growth and upside risks to inflation need to be recognised.
(i)

there is still uncertainty about the pace and shape of global recovery.
there are concerns that it is too dependent on public spending and will
unravel if governments around the world withdraw their fiscal stimuli
prematurely. as the world discovered during the recent crisis, the
global economy is heavily inter-linked through the business cycle. a
downturn in global sentiment will affect not only our external sector
but also our domestic investment.

(ii)

oil prices have been range-bound in the recent period. however, if the
global recovery turns out to be stronger than expected, oil prices may
increase sharply, driven both by prospects of demand recovery and the
return of the investment motive, which will affect all commodities.

this could stoke inflationary pressures even as growth remains below
potential.
(iii)

expectations of softening domestic inflation are contingent on food
prices moderating. this, in turn, depends significantly on the
performance of the south-west monsoon in 2010. if rainfall is
inadequate, high food prices will continue to intensify inflationary
pressures.

(iv)

so far, capital inflows have been absorbed by the current account
deficit. however, sharp increase in capital inflows, above the
absorptive capacity of the economy, may complicate exchange rate and
monetary management.

(v)

as growth accelerates and the output gap closes, excess liquidity, if
allowed to persist, may exacerbate inflation expectations.

32. beyond the above risk factors, by far a bigger risk to both short-term
economic management and to medium-term economic prospects emanates
from the large fiscal deficit. the counter-cyclical public finance measures
taken by the government as part of the crisis management were necessary;
indeed they were critical to maintaining demand when other drivers of
demand had weakened. but as the recovery gains momentum, it is important
that there is co-ordination in the fiscal and monetary exits. the reversal of
monetary accommodation cannot be effective unless there is also a roll back
of government borrowing. as indicated earlier (para 13), even as the
government borrowing had increased abruptly during 2008-09 and 2009-10, it
could be managed through a host of measures that bolstered liquidity. those
liquidity infusion options will not be available to the same extent next year.
on top of that, there will be additional constraints. inflation pressures will
remain and private credit demand will be stronger with the threat of crowding
out becoming quite real.
33. there are standard, well-known and well-founded reasons for fiscal
consolidation. for both short-term economic management and medium-term
fiscal sustainability reasons, it is imperative, therefore, that the government
returns to a path of fiscal consolidation. the consolidation can begin with a
phased roll back of the transitory components. beyond that, in the interest of
transparency and predictability, the government should ideally do two things:
first, indicate a roadmap for fiscal consolidation; and second, spell out the
broad contours of tax policies and expenditure compression that will define
this roadmap.
iii. the policy stance
34. the reserve bank has pursued an accommodative monetary policy
beginning mid-september 2008 in order to mitigate the adverse impact of the
global financial crisis on the indian economy. the measures taken instilled
confidence in market participants and helped cushion the spillover of the

global financial crisis on to our economy. however, in view of rising food
inflation and the risk of it impinging on inflationary expectations, the
reserve bank announced the first phase of exit from the expansionary
monetary policy by terminating some sector-specific facilities and restoring
the statutory liquidity ratio (slr) of scheduled commercial banks to its precrisis level in the second quarter review of october 2009.
35. against the above backdrop of global and domestic macroeconomic
conditions, outlook and risks, our policy stance in this quarter is shaped by
three important considerations:
(i)

a consolidating recovery should encourage us to clearly and explicitly
shift our stance from 'managing the crisis' to 'managing the recovery'.
we articulated this change in our stance in the october quarterly
review, but the growing confidence in the recovery justifies our
moving further in reversing the crisis-driven expansionary stance. our
main policy instruments are all currently at levels that are more
consistent with a crisis situation than with a fast-recovering economy.
it is, therefore, necessary to carry forward the process of exit further.

(ii)

though the inflationary pressures in the domestic economy stem
predominantly from the supply side, the consolidating recovery
increases the risks of these pressures spilling over into a wider
inflationary process. looking ahead into 2010-11, if the growth
momentum turns out to be as expected, pressures on capacities in an
increasing number of sectors are likely to strengthen the transmission
of higher input and wage costs into product prices.

(iii)

even amidst concerns about rising inflation, we must remember that
the recovery is yet to fully take hold. strong anti-inflationary
measures, while addressing one problem, may precipitate another by
undermining the recovery, particularly by deterring private investment
and consumer spending.

36. against this backdrop, the stance of monetary policy of the reserve
bank for the remaining period of 2009-10 will be as follows:
•

anchor inflation expectations and keep a vigil on the trends in
inflation and be prepared to respond swiftly and effectively through
policy adjustments as warranted.

•

actively manage liquidity to ensure that credit demands of productive
sectors are adequately met consistent with price stability.

•

maintain an interest rate environment consistent with price stability
and financial stability, and in support of the growth process.

iv. monetary measures
37. on the basis of the current assessment and in line with the policy
stance as outlined in section iii, the reserve bank announces the following
policy measures:
bank rate
38.

the bank rate has been retained at 6.0 per cent.

repo rate
39. the repo rate under the liquidity adjustment facility (laf) has been
retained at 4.75 per cent.
reverse repo rate
40.

the reverse repo rate under the laf has been retained at 3.25 per cent.

cash reserve ratio
41.

it has been decided to:
•

increase the cash reserve ratio (crr) of scheduled banks by 75 basis
points from 5.0 per cent to 5.75 per cent of their net demand and time
liabilities (ndtl) in two stages; the first stage of increase of 50 basis
points will be effective the fortnight beginning february 13, 2010,
followed by the next stage of increase of 25 basis points effective the
fortnight beginning february 27, 2010.

42. as a result of the increase in the crr, about rs. 36,000 crore of excess
liquidity will be absorbed from the system.
43. the reserve bank will continue to monitor macroeconomic conditions,
particularly the price situation closely and take further action as warranted.
expected outcomes
44.

the expected outcomes of the actions are:

(i)

reduction in
expectations.

(ii)

the recovery process will be supported without compromising price
stability.

(iii)

the calibrated exit will align policy instruments with the current and
evolving state of the economy.

excess

liquidity

will

help

anchor

inflationary

monetary policy 2010-11
45.

the monetary policy for 2010-11 will be announced on april 20, 2010.

mumbai
january 29, 2010

