mid-term review of
annual policy statement
for the year 2005-06

reserve bank of india
mumbai

statement by dr. y. venugopal reddy,
governor, reserve bank of india on the
mid-term review of annual policy
for the year 2005-06
this statement consists of two parts: part i. review of annual statement
on monetary policy for the year 2005-06; and part ii. review of annual
statement on developmental and regulatory policies for the year 2005-06. an
analytical review of macroeconomic and monetary developments was issued, a
day in advance as a supplement to part i of the statement, providing the
necessary information and technical analysis with the help of simple charts and
tables.
part i. mid-term review of annual statement on
monetary policy for the year 2005-06
2.
this part is divided into three sections: i. assessment of macroeconomic
and monetary developments during the first half of 2005-06; ii. stance of
monetary policy for the second half of 2005-06; and iii. monetary measures.
i. assessment of macroeconomic and monetary developments
during the first half of 2005-06
domestic developments
3.
the onset of the south-west monsoon was delayed this year by a week,
but it picked up by end-june. as per the india meteorological department (imd),
excess or normal rainfall was observed in 32 of the 36 meteorological
subdivisions and, for the country as a whole, rainfall during june-september this
year was 99 per cent of its long period average. by current assessment of area
coverage under various crops, it is likely that the kharif output may register an
increase over the previous year’s level. in addition, the improvement in water
storage levels over the previous year augurs well for the outlook on rabi
production.
4.
prospects for sustained growth in industrial output have improved in an
environment of rising investment and export demand, strong corporate
profitability and buoyant business confidence. the index of industrial production
(iip) increased by 8.8 per cent during april-august 2005 as compared with the
increase of 8.0 per cent in the corresponding period of the previous year. there

are signs of sustained growth in the production of basic goods, capital goods and
consumer goods. despite some deceleration, export growth at 20.5 per cent in
us dollar terms during april-september, 2005 has remained robust, as against
30.8 per cent in the corresponding period of the previous year.
5.
in consonance with the sustained growth of industry, there is a surge in
non-food credit growth. exports of manufactured goods and services remain
buoyant and the international business environment and investor confidence in
india continue to remain positive. domestic production and imports of capital
goods have risen strongly in tandem, indicative of ongoing capacity expansion.
with continued business expansion and lower interest costs, corporate
profitability is high and there is an expansion in internal resources available for
investment. these factors have found reflection in upbeat sentiments and a
brightened investment climate. the assessment of the corporate sector as
reflected in the reserve bank’s industrial outlook survey presents an optimistic
picture and the expectations regarding the overall business situation for the
october-december 2005 quarter have improved further. the performance
indicators for output, exports, working capital finance requirements and capacity
utilisation are expected to be well above their levels a year ago. other business
expectation surveys also exhibited similar improvements in outlook.
6.
according to the central statistical organisation (cso), real gdp
increased by 8.1 per cent during the first quarter of 2005-06 as against 7.6 per
cent in the first quarter of the previous year. the elevated level of international
crude prices imparts downside risks to overall gdp growth. at the same time, the
robust industrial and service sector growth and buoyant exports are likely to have
some positive impact on growth.
7.
scheduled commercial banks’ credit increased by 14.2 per cent
(rs.1,55,712 crore) up to september 30, 2005 which was higher than the
increase
of
11.7
per
cent
(rs.98,210 crore) in the corresponding period of last year. food credit declined
by rs.1,571 crore – as against an increase of rs .2,677 crore in the previous year
– reflecting lower procurement of foodgrains during the current financial year. on
the other hand, non-food credit posted an increase of 14.8 per cent (rs.1,57,284
crore) as compared with an increase of 11.9 per cent (rs.95,533 crore) in the
corresponding period of the previous year. while the outstanding credit-deposit
ratio increased to 65.8 per cent from 58.4 per cent a year ago, the incremental

non-food credit-deposit ratio declined to 75.2 per cent as compared with 92.9 per
cent.
8.
on a year-on-year basis, non-food credit growth at 31.5 per cent, net of
conversion, as on september 30, 2005 was higher as compared with 24.9 per
cent a year ago. non-food credit has witnessed a structural shift towards the nonagriculture non-industrial sectors in recent years. credit off-take during the
current financial year (up to august 2005) has, however, been broad-based.
credit to industry increased by 21 per cent whereas credit off-take by agriculture
and non-agriculture non-industrial sectors increased by over 35 per cent each.
the growth in credit to non-agriculture non-industrial sector is led by housing,
real estate and personal loans. within the industrial sector, significant increase in
credit off-take has been recorded by petroleum, coal products, power, roads and
ports, cotton textiles, drugs and pharmaceuticals, gems and jewellery, iron and
steel, other metal and metal products, automobiles and engineering.
9.
scheduled commercial banks’ investments in bonds/debentures/shares of
public sector undertakings and private corporate sector, commercial paper (cp),
etc., declined by 11.7 per cent (rs.11,043 crore) during the current year so far
(up to september 30, 2005) as compared with a decline of 3.9 per cent (rs.3,463
crore) in the corresponding period last year. scheduled commercial banks’
investments in instruments issued by financial institutions (fis) and mutual funds
also declined by rs.3 ,835 crore as against a decline of rs.2,864 crore in the
previous year. with the significant expansion in non-food credit demand, the total
flow of resources from scheduled commercial banks to the commercial sector
increased by 12.7 per cent (rs.1 ,46,241 crore) as compared with the increase of
10.3 per cent (rs.92,070 crore) in the corresponding period of the previous year.
the year-on-year growth in resource flow was also higher at 27.8 per cent, net of
conversion, as against 21.4 per cent a year ago.
10.

money supply (m3) increased by 9.6 per cent (rs.2,15,394 crore) in the
current financial year up to september 30, 2005 as compared with 5.4 per cent
(rs.1,08,791 crore) in the corresponding period of the previous year. on an
annual basis, growth in m3 at 16.6 per cent, net of conversion, was higher than
14.6 per cent in the previous year. aggregate deposits of scheduled commercial
banks rose by 12.3 per cent (rs.2 ,09,015 crore) as compared with an increase of
6.8 per cent (rs.1,02,885 crore) in the corresponding period of the previous year.
on an annual basis, the growth in aggregate deposits at 18.6 per cent, net of
conversion, was higher than that of 15.8 per cent a year ago.

11.
reserve money increased by 5.8 per cent (rs.28,557 crore) in the current
financial year up to october 14, 2005 as compared with the increase of 0.6 per
cent (rs.2,660 crore) in the corresponding period of the previous year. while
currency in circulation increased by 6.1 per cent (rs.22,516 crore) as compared
with 4.3 per cent (rs.14,039 crore), bankers’ deposits with rbi increased by 6.5
per cent (rs.7,431 crore) as against a decline of 12.4 per cent (rs.12,930 crore).
as regards the sources of reserve money, net rbi credit to the central
government increased by rs.11,897 crore as against a decline of rs.21,395
crore. adjusted for transactions under the liquidity adjustment facility (laf), net
rbi credit to the central government showed a lower increase of rs.1 ,822 crore.
the reserve bank’s net foreign exchange assets (nfea) increased by
rs.24,272 crore as against a higher increase of rs.58,342 crore during the
corresponding period of the previous year. nfea adjusted for revaluation,
however, increased by rs.30,585 crore as compared with an increase of
rs.31,737 crore during the corresponding period of the previous year. the rbi’s
credit to banks and the commercial sector continued to decline because of
reduced reliance on the standing facilities on account of comfortable liquidity
conditions. the year-on-year increase in reserve money was 17.9 per cent as on
october 14, 2005 as compared with 18.0 per cent a year ago. the balances
under the market stabilisation scheme (mss) which were rs.64,211 crore as on
march 31, 2005 increased to rs.68,276 crore by october 14, 2005. the ratio of
nfea to currency declined marginally from 166.2 per cent in march to 162.9 per
cent
(145.4 per cent, adjusted for mss) by october 14, 2005.
12.
inflation, as measured by variations in the wholesale price index (wpi), on
a point-to-point basis, receded from 6.0 per cent in april 2005 to 4.6 per cent by
october 8, 2005 despite upward adjustments in the administered prices of petrol,
diesel and electricity and increase in the prices of aviation turbine fuel, naphtha,
furnace oil and iron and steel. on an average basis, annual inflation based on the
wpi was 5.3 per cent as on october 8, 2005 as compared with 6.2 per cent a
year ago.
13.
at a disaggregated level, the prices of primary articles (weight: 22.0 per
cent in the wpi basket) increased by 2.5 per cent as compared with an increase
of 3.8 per cent in the previous year. the fall in prices of primary articles was
mainly under non-food articles – raw cotton, oilseeds and sugarcane – and
minerals, particularly iron ore. prices of manufactured products (weight: 63.7 per

cent) increased by 2.6 per cent as compared with 7.2 per cent a year ago. in the
category of manufactured products, declines in the prices of edible oils, oil cakes,
cotton textiles and manmade fibres softened the effects of sharp increases in the
prices of basic metals, alloys and metal products (particularly, iron and steel),
chemicals and chemical products and machinery and machine tools.
14.
the annual increase in prices of the ‘fuel, power, light and lubricants’
group (weight: 14.2 per cent) at 12.0 per cent (as on october 8, 2005) was higher
than 10.7 per cent a year ago. excluding the fuel group, however, inflation on an
annual basis at 2.1 per cent was significantly lower than headline inflation. during
2005-06 so far, oil prices in the international markets have continued to remain
high and volatile with the latest spike occurring at the end of august on account
of hurricane katrina in the us. the average price of a basket of major
international crude varieties (brent, wti and dubai fateh) at around us $60 per
barrel during july-october 2005 was 18.4 per cent higher than in april-june 2005
and 42.6 per cent higher than its level a year ago. domestic prices of petrol and
diesel were revised upwards in june and again in september 2005. with the
latest hike in prices effective september 6, 2005 the average domestic price of
petrol and diesel (in the four metropolitan cities) has increased by 13.6 per cent
over the end-march 2005 level and 22.0 per cent over the level a year ago.
15.
the full effects of the pass-through of the increase in international oil
prices have so far been dulled and the underlying inflationary pressures have
been contained. crude prices continue to remain the most critical factor in the
outlook on domestic inflation. in the remaining part of the year, inflation
conditions will warrant continuous vigil in view of the heightened uncertainties
surrounding international crude prices and the eventual pressures for fuller passthrough into domestic inflation.
16.
inflation, as measured by variations in the consumer price index (cpi) for
industrial workers on a point-to-point basis, was 3.5 per cent in august 2005 as
against 4.6 per cent a year ago. on an annual average basis, inflation as
reflected
in
the
cpi,
was 4.1 per cent in august 2005 as against 3.4 per cent a year ago.
17.
the market borrowing programme of the central government has so far
remained consistent with the projections set out in the union budget for 2005-06
which placed the net and gross market borrowings of the central government at
rs.1,10,291 crore and rs.1,78,467 crore, respectively. by october 21, 2005 the

central government had completed net market borrowings of rs.59,831 crore
(54.3 per cent of the budgeted amount) and gross market borrowings of
rs.1,08,506 crore (60.8 per cent of the budgeted amount). the central
government’s borrowing programme broadly proceeded in alignment with the
indicative issuance calendar for dated securities for the first half of 2005-06
which set gross borrowings through issuance of dated securities at rs.83,000
crore. all issuances of dated securities were by way of fixed coupons in response
to the favourable market appetite for such securities. during the second half,
however, out of the two auctions scheduled in the indicative calendar of dated
securities on october 6, 2005 all bids received in respect of one auction were
rejected. on a review of the borrowing requirements, the auction of dated
securities scheduled for october 18-25, 2005 for an amount of rs.4,000 crore
was cancelled in consultation with the central government. the weighted
average yield on fresh borrowings through dated securities increased to 7.29 per
cent (up to october 21), up from 5.76 per cent in the corresponding period last
year. the weighted average maturity of dated securities of the central
government increased to 15.1 years from 14.3 years over the same period. all
issuances during the current financial year, except one, were reissuances
reflecting efforts towards consolidation of public debt and imparting liquidity to the
government securities market. as against the provisional net allocation of
rs.16,112 crore (gross rs.22,431 crore) for their market borrowing programme,
the state governments have raised rs.6,274 crore (net) and rs.14,265 crore
(gross) up to october 21, 2005.
18.
during 2005-06 so far (up to october 14, 2005), additional liquidity of
rs.4,065 crore was absorbed under the mss. notwithstanding the mss
operations, surplus liquidity conditions resulted in the reverse repo volumes
tendered under the laf increasing from an average of rs.29,809 crore in march
to rs.34,832 crore in august before declining to rs.21,128 crore in october
2005. up to july, the absorption of liquidity through the mss was more than
offset by decreasing reverse repo levels. thereafter, laf reverse repo increased
sharply as liquidity conditions eased with the resumption of inflows from abroad.
large mss redemption in september resulted in accretions under laf and
absorption through acceptance of higher bids under fresh auctions. in addition to
the mss and the laf, surplus balances in the central government account with
the reserve bank rose from an average of rs.5,142 crore in april-october 2004
to rs.18,643 crore in april-october 2005 and also helped in sterilising excess

liquidity from time to time. accordingly, the total liquidity that remained sterilised
(in the form of mss, laf and surplus balances of central government)
increased from an average of about rs.1 ,14,192 crore in march to
rs.1,23,844 crore in august before declining to rs.1,20,076 crore in october
2005.
19.
the revenue deficit and gross fiscal deficit (gfd) of the central
government at rs.74,372 crore and rs.86,328 crore, respectively, during aprilaugust, 2005 accounted for about 78.0 per cent and 57.1 per cent of the budget
estimates for 2005-06 as compared with 82.6 per cent and 38.2 per cent,
respectively, in the corresponding period of 2004-05. during april-august 2005,
the revenue deficit of the centre was higher by 18.2 per cent than its level in the
corresponding period of the previous year while the gfd was higher by 64.4 per
cent. adjusted for transactions under the discontinued debt swap
scheme, the gfd was higher by only 8.1 per cent than its level a year ago.
20.
the market borrowing programme of the centre and the states envisaged
for 2005-06 is higher than in the previous year. superimposed upon the
underlying liquidity conditions and shifts in banks’ portfolio preferences in favour
of credit as compared with investments, this has entailed some hardening of
yields. continued large borrowings from the market by the centre and the states
pose concerns for the efficient conduct of debt management as well as for
monetary operations. in this context, the renewed commitment to fiscal
consolidation through reduction in the revenue deficit and the gross fiscal deficit
at all levels of government and the diffusion of fiscal responsibility legislation at
the sub-national level is heartening. states’ budgets for 2005-06 have generally
not taken into account the recommendations of the twelfth finance commission
(tfc) relating to devolution, transfers and debt relief. with the phasing out of
central plan loans to the states as recommended by the tfc, the market
borrowings of the states is not likely to be out of alignment with the net allocation
for 2005-06 in the light of higher devolution of taxes and grants from the centre
to the states and larger receipts from the national small saving fund (nssf).
21.
scheduled commercial banks’ investment in government and other
approved securities at rs.14,283 crore during the current year so far (up to
september 30, 2005) was lower than that of rs.28,526 crore in the
corresponding period of the previous year, partly on account of the pick-up in
credit demand. there has been substantial support for the market borrowing

programme from non-bank entities. commercial banks’ excess holding of slr
securities stood at rs.2 ,24,701 crore.
22.
financial markets have remained stable and orderly although interest
rates have firmed up in almost all segments. the average call money rate
increased from 4.77 per cent in april to 5.06 per cent in october 2005 (up to
october 21) although it has generally remained closely aligned with the laf
reverse repo rate. the 91-day and the 364-day treasury bill rates also increased
from 5.12 per cent and 5.60 per cent in april to 5.53 per cent and 5.85 per cent,
respectively, by october 2005. the 182-day treasury bill rate has moved up
from 5.21 per cent to 5.78 per cent during this period. the yield on government
securities with 1-year residual maturity in the secondary market increased from
5.66 per cent to 5.88 per cent. the yield on government securities with 10-year
and 20-year residual maturities increased from 6.68 per cent and 7.08 per cent to
7.18 per cent and 7.52 per cent, respectively. with a relatively higher increase in
the long-term yields, there was a steepening of the yield curve. the yield spread
between 10-year and 1-year government securities moved up from 102 basis
points to 130 basis points whereas the spread between 20-year and 1-year
government securities increased from 142 basis points to 164 basis points.
23.
the weighted average discount rate on commercial paper (cp) of 61 to
90-days maturity increased from 5.80 per cent in april to 5.89 per cent by midoctober 2005. the market repo rate increased from 4.63 per cent to 4.85 per
cent with an increase in daily volume from rs.3,958 crore (one leg) to rs.5,661
crore by september 2005. the average daily volume of cblo (collateralised
borrowing and lending obligation) increased significantly from rs.5,185 crore to
rs.8,572 crore along with an increase in the cblo rate from 4.58 per cent to
4.80 per cent. the typical interest rate on 3-month certificates of deposit (cds)
increased from 5.87 per cent in april to 5.90 per cent by mid-september 2005.
public sector banks kept their rates for deposits of over one year maturity
unchanged in the range of 5.25-6.50 per cent during april-september, 2005. the
benchmark prime lending rates (bplrs) of public sector banks, private sector
banks and foreign banks remained unchanged in the range of 10.25-11.25 per
cent, 11.00-13.50 per cent and 10.00-14.50 per cent, respectively.
24.
the risk premium on private sector bonds, as measured by the yield
spread between highly rated corporate paper and government securities, has
increased. for example, the yield spread between aaa-rated corporate bonds of

5 years and government securities of similar maturity increased from about 34
basis points in april to about 47 basis points by october 21, 2005.
25.
equity market activity recorded a pick-up in terms of issuances in the
domestic primary segment as well as in international stock exchanges. the bse
sensex recovered from weak sentiment in april and rallied with intermittent
corrections in the successive months. the sensex rose to a new peak of 8800 on
october 4, 2005 after which it registered some decline.
developments in the external sector
26.
india’s exports during april-september, 2005 increased by 20.5 per cent in
us dollar terms as compared with 30.8 per cent in the corresponding period of
the previous year. india’s merchandise export growth surpassed that of most
asian countries during this period. imports rose by 33.1 per cent as against an
increase of 37.3 per cent in the corresponding period last year. while oil import
growth
moderated
to
42.9
per
cent
from
58.2 per cent a year ago, non-oil import growth of 28.8 per cent was comparable
to 29.8 per cent last year. the overall trade deficit during april-september 2005
widened to us $ 20.3 billion from us $ 11.9 billion a year ago, reflecting the
hardening of international crude oil prices and more significantly, import demand
emanating from a pick-up in domestic industrial activity.
27.
during april-august, 2005 export growth was broad-based at a
disaggregated level, but mainly led by manufactures such as engineering goods
(28.9 per cent), gems and jewellery (23.9 per cent) and chemicals (21.8 per
cent). within engineering goods, machinery and instruments, transport
equipment and manufactures of metals recorded acceleration of growth. exports
of petroleum products remained buoyant as in the preceding two years. exports
to developing countries in asia increased by about 34.4 per cent. among the
major partner countries, significant increases in exports were recorded in respect
of latin america, singapore, china, south korea, hong kong, the netherlands,
france and the uk. as regards imports, non-oil imports excluding gold and silver
rose by 36.7 per cent during april-august, 2005 led by imports of industrial
inputs. within the latter category, imports of capital goods posted a growth of
33.5 per cent, while imports of iron and steel surged by 109.9 per cent, both
reflecting the sustained expansion of domestic demand. in terms of sources of
imports, china, switzerland, the us, belgium, germany, the uae and australia
were the major trade partners. with the large expansion in non-oil imports, the

non-oil trade deficit rose to us $ 4.8 billion in april-august, 2005 from us $ 0.2
billion a year ago.
28.
during 2004-05, the current account recorded a deficit of us $ 6.4 billion
after remaining in surplus over the preceding three years beginning in 2001-02. a
key factor underlying the phenomenon of current account balances has been the
buoyancy in net invisible earnings which has been sustained in the current
financial year so far. nevertheless, the sharp widening of the trade deficit
resulted in the current account recording a deficit of us $ 6.2 billion in april-june
2005
as
against
a
surplus
of
us $ 3.4 billion in the corresponding quarter of 2004-05.
29.
net capital flows remained buoyant in april-june, 2005 due to surge in
both debt and non-debt inflows. foreign direct investment flows increased to us
$ 1.1 billion from us $ 0.7 billion a year ago. debt flows (net) in the form of
external assistance, external commercial borrowings, non-resident deposits and
short-term credit declined to us $ 1.1 billion in april-june 2005 from us $ 2.1
billion a year ago. although investment by foreign institutional investors (fiis)
was subdued in the first two months of 2005-06, there has been a significant
revival since then with net inflows of us $ 4.2 billion in
april-september, 2005 as against us $ 0.3 billion in the corresponding period of
2004-05. net accretion to foreign exchange reserves, including valuation
changes, amounted to us $ 1.9 billion during april-october, 2005 taking the level
of the reserves to us $ 143.4 billion as on october 14, 2005.
30.
the indian foreign exchange market has generally witnessed orderly
conditions during the current financial year so far. the exchange rate of the
rupee, which was rs.43.75 per us dollar at end-march, 2005 depreciated by 3.0
per cent to rs.45.09 per us dollar by october 21, 2005. however, it appreciated
by 4.2 per cent against the euro, by 2.5 per cent against the pound sterling and
by 4.5 per cent against the japanese yen during the period.
31.
the payment obligation on account of the redemption of india millennium
deposits (imds) of about us $ 7.1 billion is due in december 2005. the reserve
bank is closely co-ordinating with the state bank of india (sbi) and other banks,
and it would be ensured that the discharge of liabilities has no adverse impact on
the indian financial market.
32.
there are significant shifts within the balance of payments which have
implications for the conduct of monetary policy. with the import-gdp ratio having

risen to 17.2 per cent in 2004-05 after hovering around 13.0 per cent during the
previous five years, the trade deficit is emerging as the key determinant of india’s
balance of payments. although overall earnings from net invisibles have been
buoyant, the large turnaround in the current account balance during 2004-05 and
the first quarter of 2005-06 to a deficit from a continuous run of surpluses in
2001-04 has entailed expanded external financing requirements in the form of a
step-up in recourse to debt flows and a distinct moderation in the accretion to the
reserves.
33.
the strength of merchandise and invisible exports is a heartening feature
in india’s balance of payments prospects. while the recent trend in imports may
continue to persist in the face of high and volatile crude oil prices and the large
increase in investment demand, the sizeable expansion in imports is also
spurring productivity increases and vigorous export growth. moreover,
remittances from indians employed abroad at 3.3 per cent of gdp seem to be of
a significantly permanent nature. it is in this context that the current level of the
trade deficit and the current account deficit appear to be manageable through
normal capital flows. in view of the simultaneous hike in oil prices and continued
strong investment demand, however, the evolving developments in the balance
of payments warrant careful and continuous monitoring. the substitution of debt
by non-debt flows in preceding years gives room for manoeuvre since debt
levels, particularly external commercial borrowings, have been moderate. the
emphasis would continue to be on encouraging inflows through foreign direct
investment and enhancement of the quality of portfolio flows. prudential oversight
over financial intermediaries, especially banks, in respect of their foreign
exchange exposures and transactions are a dynamic component of management
of the capital account as well as financial supervision, especially as the process
of financial liberalisation gains momentum.
developments in the global economy
34.
global economic activity slackened in the second quarter of 2005, stalled
by weak growth in the euro area and japan though domestic demand was
sustained in the us. in emerging asia - led by china and india - as well as in
several developing countries in latin america, the middle east and russia,
growth has been robust. high and volatile international crude prices, global
macroeconomic imbalances, international currency movements and the
increasingly divergent growth profiles across regions have dampened the
prospects for global recovery which had firmed up in the first half of 2004 and in

the first quarter of 2005. the international monetary fund (imf) expects global
output growth to slow down, albeit moderately, to 4.3 per cent in 2005 from 5.1
per cent in 2004.
35.
elevated levels of international crude prices have driven up consumer
price inflation in most of the advanced economies in the third quarter of 2005
though it has remained stable in japan. inflation has also risen in major emerging
market economies and other developing countries. in emerging asia, consumer
price inflation has edged up in almost all countries except china. the hardening
of energy, metals and minerals prices seems to have imparted some upward
push to inflation. the rise in oil prices has triggered fears of generalised
inflationary pressures globally.
36.
oil prices remain the single largest risk to the global economy,
exacerbated by the continued increase in global demand, geopolitical
uncertainties, strong refining demand and a series of supply disruptions.
worldwide petroleum demand growth is projected to remain strong during 2005
and 2006 and tepid production growth is expected in non-opec countries,
leaving spare production capacity at its lowest level in three decades. though
there has been build-up in inventory levels in the oecd countries in the first half
of 2005, demand has grown rapidly as well. a large component of the oil price
increase is now being reckoned as permanent which needs to be eventually
passed on to the consumers in the medium-term. governments in some
countries have tried to partially insulate their economies from rising oil prices by
subsidising the use of energy. a cut in the subsidy in the future, while being
desirable, could lead to significant increase in domestic inflation and higher
interest rates in the short-term.
37.
risks to global growth also emanate from the persisting macroeconomic
imbalances and the resulting abundance of global liquidity which carries the
potential of fuelling asset bubbles, excessive leveraging in financial markets and
threats to global financial stability. the current configuration of good growth, low
inflation, abundant liquidity, flat yield curves, lowering of credit risk premia and
ever-expanding search for yields has also benefited many emerging market
economies which have strengthened their macro-fundamentals in an
environment of low inflation, improved fiscal positions and balance of payments
and substantial accumulation of foreign exchange reserves. on the downside,
the same combination of factors has allowed the macro imbalances to widen and
has resulted in a build-up of large volumes of debt, especially by the household

sector. this has amplified the potential for sudden shifts in portfolios, investor
preferences and currency alignments. the addition to global saving as a result of
the increase in surpluses of oil exporters has enabled persistence of underpricing of risks and a diffusion of risks across sectors. these factors have
imparted an apparent stability to the financial system while sowing seeds of
potential disequilibrium that might require a larger adjustment at a later stage. in
the light of these developments, available evidence indicates that global
imbalances have not really unwound but on the contrary, have perhaps
worsened and amplified the surrounding uncertainties and risks.
38.
of the major central banks, the us fed has raised its policy rate by 25
basis points each on eleven occasions from 1.0 per cent in june 2004 to 3.75 per
cent by september 2005 while providing clear indications of a measured rise in
the policy rate in the near term. the bank of england has reduced its repo rate to
4.50 per cent in august 2005 in response to slowing domestic growth, after
holding it steady at 4.75 per cent since august 2004. the european central bank
(ecb) has kept its policy rate unchanged at 2.0 per cent since june 2003.
monetary policy has been tightened in several economies in emerging asia,
primarily in response to higher fuel prices. the indications in policy debates are
towards either tightening or withdrawal of the accommodative stance.
39.
the state of flux characterising global macroeconomic and financial
conditions has confronted the conduct of monetary policy in various parts of the
world with a similar spectrum of uncertainties and shifts therein. in fact, policy
decision making in all countries has had to contend with difficulties of
distinguishing news from noise in monitoring variables that are used to gauge the
state of economic activity and the evolution of financial markets. this has made
the dilemmas facing monetary policy sharper and policy errors costlier than
before. in turn, this has brought about considerable cross-fertilisation and
convergence in policy settings, choice of instruments and communication
strategies. for monetary authorities vested with multiple objectives, the challenge
is to continually rebalance the weights assigned to each, from as informed a
judgment call as is feasible, given the prevailing uncertainties. considerations of
financial stability have, in particular, become a distinct dimension in the
conventional trade-off between growth and price stability. superimposed upon
these overarching issues are country-specific factors which warrant tailored
policy responses. for india, the linkages with the rest of the world in the context
of the growing integration with the global economy are getting stronger and
accordingly, global developments are becoming increasingly significant.

nevertheless, the evolution of domestic conditions of high growth with price
stability, stable and vibrant financial markets and institutions, comfortable foreign
exchange reserves and the entrenchment of democratic processes provide room
for flexible and timely responses to the evolving circumstances in an uncertain
external environment.
ii. stance of monetary policy for
the second half of 2005-06
40.
the first quarter review on july 26, 2005 reiterated the stance of the
annual statement on monetary policy on the basis of a broadly unchanged
assessment of the macroeconomic outlook. it, however, noted that increased
global uncertainties, high and volatile international prices of oil, incomplete passthrough of oil prices domestically, upward trajectory of the policy rate in the us,
overhang of liquidity, high credit growth, sustained industrial growth and possible
capacity pressures, enlargement of the trade deficit, infrastructural constraints
and delayed monsoon could prompt a change in the stance of policy. on the
other hand, the monetary and fiscal measures to mitigate the impact of the oil
price hike, increase in absorptive capacity of the economy, broad-based credit
flow, revival in industrial growth after a long period of sluggishness, pick-up in
investment demand and favourable investment climate, sustained corporate
earnings and profits, moderate wholesale and retail inflation and projection of
moderate global inflation for 2005 despite high oil prices favoured status quo on
the monetary policy stance while monitoring the unfolding constellation of
uncertainties, especially in the global arena.
41.
the conduct of monetary policy during the first half of 2005-06 has been
broadly in accordance with the stated stance. on balance, macroeconomic and
financial conditions have evolved as anticipated. first, overall industrial growth
has strengthened albeit with infrastructure emerging as a potential constraint.
second, monsoon fears have eased although the full effects on agricultural
production would depend on the spatial distribution of rainfall, the impact of the
initial delay in the onset of the monsoon and excess rainfall in the last week of
july 2005. third, non-food credit growth has been buoyant, broad-based and
supportive of the acceleration in industrial activity. nevertheless, the rising
shares of housing and real estate, in particular, has warranted precautionary
policy action to ensure credit quality. fourth, the demand for government
securities from insurance companies and other non-bank financial institutions

has been sustained and the competing demand for funds between the
government and the commercial sector has been balanced by appropriate
liquidity
management
by
the
reserve bank. fifth, a pick-up in investment demand is evident and the business
climate has improved considerably with external demand providing impulses of
growth for a range of industries.
42.
as regards the commitment to macroeconomic and price stability, there
have been several developments that have reinforced the policy stance. first,
monetary conditions have evolved in an orderly manner. money supply remained
below the projected trajectory in the first four months of the current financial year,
though it has inched up during the last two months due to rapid credit expansion.
reserve money growth has been somewhat higher than in the previous year.
demand deposits have recorded strong growth pari passu with the expansion of
non-food credit, compensating for the slower growth of time deposits. the
slowdown in net bank credit to the government sector has helped in
accommodating the surge in credit to the commercial sector. second, there has
been a supportive response of liquidity management by the reserve bank to
portfolio shifts of market participants. liquidity mismatches have been met in an
orderly manner with the flexibility available, particularly under the laf
mechanism and operation of mss. third, the pass-through of the escalation in
international crude prices to domestic petroleum product prices has been
managed well and timed into the ebbing phase of inflation. accordingly, the
inflationary outcome has so far turned out to be consistent with initial projections
and inflationary expectations are contained. fourth, financial markets have
remained stable and supportive of growth. fifth, even as high oil prices and
domestic demand emanating from buoyant industrial activity have resulted in a
significant widening of the trade deficit, this has automatically absorbed the
capital flows and economised on monetary policy action to sterilise these flows.
at the same time, the rising international competitiveness of india’s invisible
exports and remittances from indians working overseas have ensured that the
current account deficit remains within manageable limits.
43.
several factors posing risks to the outlook on growth and inflation have,
however, emerged in the recent months. first, it would be prudent to recognise
the need to ensure credit quality in light of the high expansion of non-food credit
so that a positive investment climate prevails with minimal risks and constraints.
second, infrastructure has emerged as a major bottleneck for development and
the pace of investment in infrastructure needs to pick up further to support growth

in the long-term. despite high non-food credit growth, the share of credit to
infrastructure remains low relative to the size and state of the economy. third,
inflation is low in terms of commodity prices but asset prices, especially housing
prices, have registered a substantial increase. asset price changes can have a
powerful effect on investment and/or consumption through a financial accelerator
effect and in this context, large swings in asset prices continue to pose a
challenge for monetary policy. from an analytical perspective, especially in view
of non-linearities in asset price changes, such a high growth needs to be
monitored carefully. fourth, global crude oil prices continue to be high and
volatile and an overwhelming part of the increase in recent years is now
increasingly being regarded as permanent. so far, the second round impact of
the increase has not been as strong as anticipated earlier but withholding of
prices by companies treating the increase as a transitory supply shock will slowly
have to give way. given the persistent nature of the oil price increase, the
possibility of a larger pass-through cannot be ruled out. the oil economy,
nevertheless, poses a serious challenge to sustaining low inflationary
expectations. fifth, the trade deficit has been widening with the surge in imports,
both oil and non-oil, but the invisible surplus and capital inflows have ensured a
comfortable balance of payments situation. no doubt, evolving magnitudes of the
current account deficits need to be recognised even though they are
manageable. the level of foreign exchange reserves provides some comfort on
this front though the situation needs a careful watch. sixth, international interest
rates cycles had so far shown mixed behaviour but currently the general
indications are that the accommodative stance is being withdrawn and, in some
cases, may be tightened. this has implications for capital flows. nevertheless,
the overall positive sentiment, the business confidence of the private sector and
the strength as well as resilience of the domestic economy would continue to be
the major determinants of capital flows. ultimately, the approach to managing the
external sector, the choice of instruments and the timing and sequencing of
policies are matters of informed judgement. all these factors warrant close
monitoring for sustaining the growth process with a tolerable level of inflation.
44.
in the context of the evolving scenario for the oil economy, some key
features merit clear recognition. first, at this stage of development, current levels
of energy intensity of the indian economy are likely to persist over the mediumterm. second, although attention has increasingly turned to conservation, energy
saving devices are not likely to yield substantial gain in the short- to mediumterm. third, the level of domestic supplies of crude petroleum has stagnated over

the past few years and significant increases are not envisaged in the immediate
future. furthermore, increases in global supplies are expected to be modest in
view of capacity constraints. fourth, global demand for petroleum products is
expected to remain robust. the combined impact of these factors could result in
a compositional shift in the supply side in favour of coal and gas, but the reliance
on petroleum will continue to grow significantly. accordingly, persistence of the
indian economy’s sizeable dependency on imports of petroleum and products is
inevitable. under these conditions, it is necessary to prepare for some further
adjustments in relative prices. thus, upside inflationary pressures from oil prices
can be expected to continue with attendant direct and indirect effects. so far,
there has been only partial pass-through of international crude prices into
domestic prices of petroleum products and second round effects have not yet
become noticeably significant. at this stage, therefore, it is necessary to contain
inflationary expectations in response to the evolving oil scenario and continue to
take measures in a forward looking manner.
45.
in section i of this part, detailed analysis has been presented on the likely
levels of major macroeconomic and monetary aggregates after assessing the
relevant factors. in view of these and for the purpose of monetary management:
(i) based on the current assessment of a pick-up in agricultural output and in the
momentum in industrial and services sectors, gdp growth in 2005-06 is placed
in the range of 7.0-7.5 per cent against around 7.0 per cent as projected earlier;
and (ii) the commitment to price stability has earned some success during the
year so far. given the outlook for inflation primarily in the context of the oil
economy in india, however, it may be difficult to contain the inflation in the range
of 5.0-5.5 per cent projected earlier without an appropriate policy response. it is
also necessary to recognise and formulate a forward looking policy response in a
manner that the growth momentum and the potential for higher growth is
realised without adding to inflation expectations. accordingly, expansion in m3
would be somewhat higher than 14.5 per cent projected earlier and growth in
aggregate deposits would be higher than rs.2,60,000 crore projected earlier.
non-food bank credit including investments in bonds/debentures/shares of public
sector undertakings and private corporate sector, commercial paper (cp), etc., is
expected to increase significantly, higher than 19.0 per cent projected earlier.
there are several factors that warrant continuous vigilance for ensuring
macroeconomic and financial stability which is critical for maintaining the growth
momentum. while rapid growth in non-food credit requires due diligence, the oil
economy and price changes would also need careful monitoring for reining in

inflationary expectations. the level of capacity utilisation is high and in the
current phase of economic growth, capacity expansion in the indian industry
needs to be supported. the liquidity position continues to be comfortable,
providing some flexibility to support the investment and export demand in the
economy to maintain the growth momentum without undue pressure on prices
and in this context, monetary policy would continue to strive for maintaining
stable inflationary expectations and orderly financial markets while ensuring the
continuation of the positive investment climate.
46.
against the backdrop of developments during 2005-06 so far, the stance
of monetary policy would depend on the macroeconomic developments including
the global scenario. a key factor is the assessment of the risks in as accurate a
manner as is feasible. globally, the major risks are from heightened uncertainties
associated with the unwinding of macroeconomic imbalances and consequent
currency adjustments as well as the future course of international crude prices. a
significant part of the oil price rise, which is currently being treated as permanent,
would result in higher pass-through and, coupled with the secondary effect,
poses a challenge for monetary policy. domestically, the related adjustment of
prices of petroleum products and second round effects on overall inflation, the
rapid credit growth and potential for erosion in credit quality are factors that
warrant careful and continuous monitoring. as regards the external sector, the
growing trade deficit and its financing are relevant to the monetary policy stance.
at the same time, there is need to recognise the favourable factors that
characterise the indian economy. the oil price hike has not seriously hampered
growth prospects or significantly affected inflationary expectations so far.
investment demand is strengthening amidst a congenial business climate and
corporate earnings and profits have been sustained.
47.
in the annual policy statement of april 2005, attention was drawn to
several global uncertainties which complicate the conduct of monetary policy. in
particular, it was indicated that the rise in oil prices appears to have a large
permanent component which makes it important to factor in the second round
effects in assessing the impact on inflation and growth. more recently, the large
increase
in
export
earnings
of
oil-exporting countries has added to the overhang of global liquidity which could
accentuate inflationary pressures if capacity pressures emerge and market
conditions tighten. second, in the context of the inflation scenario, the turning up
of the interest rate cycle was expected to weigh heavily on the outlook for

financial stability. third, risks to global growth were also seen in the incomplete
and delayed adjustment of major currencies to the global imbalances. at the
current juncture, it appears that some of these uncertainties seem to be
materialising, resulting in rising inflation expectations and the withdrawal of
accommodation in the monetary policy stance in several economies. while in
india, the domestic factors continue to prevail over global factors, suggestive of
continued preference for stability, recent domestic developments add to the case
for a prompt policy response. while responding appropriately to the current
situation, it is necessary to be in readiness to take further measures as warranted
to meet the challenges posed by the evolving situation, given the unfolding of the
risks.
48.
it is necessary, both for policy makers and market participants, to
recognise interest rate cycles and strengthen risk management processes to
cope with eventualities so that financial stability could be maintained and interest
rate movements could be transited in a non-disruptive manner. in this regard, it is
instructive to observe global trends as the indian economy is progressively
getting linked to the world economy. while domestic liquidity, partly mirroring
global liquidity, is critical, the trends in global interest rates, inflation expectations
and investment demand would also have some relevance in the evolution of
domestic interest rates. it will, therefore, be desirable to contain inflationary
pressures to stabilise domestic financing conditions both for the government and
the private sector.
49.
the reserve bank will continue to ensure that appropriate liquidity is
maintained in the system so that all legitimate requirements of credit are met,
consistent with the objective of price stability. towards this end, rbi will continue
with its policy of active demand management of liquidity through omo including
mss, laf and crr, and using all the policy instruments at its disposal flexibly,
as and when the situation warrants.
50.
in sum, barring the emergence of any adverse and unexpected
developments in various sectors of the economy and keeping in view the current
assessment of the economy including the outlook for inflation, the overall stance
of monetary policy for the remaining part of the year will be:
•

consistent with emphasis on price stability, provision of appropriate
liquidity to meet genuine credit needs and support export and
investment demand in the economy.

•

ensuring an interest rate environment that is conducive to
macroeconomic and price stability, and maintaining the growth
momentum.

•

to consider measures in a calibrated and prompt manner, in
response to evolving circumstances with a view to stabilising
inflationary expectations.
iii. monetary measures

(a) bank rate
51.
in the annual policy statement of april 2005, the bank rate was kept
unchanged at 6.0 per cent. on a review of the macroeconomic developments, it
is considered desirable to leave the bank rate unchanged at 6.0 per cent.
(b) reverse repo rate
52.
in view of the current macroeconomic and overall monetary conditions, it
has been decided:
•

to increase the fixed reverse repo rate under the liquidity adjustment
facility (laf) of the reserve bank by 25 basis points with effect from
october 26, 2005 to 5.25 per cent from 5.0 per cent.

53.
the repo rate will continue to be linked to the reverse repo rate. the
spread between the reverse repo rate and the repo rate has been retained at 100
basis points, as at present. accordingly, the fixed repo rate under laf will be
6.25 per cent, effective october 26, 2005.
(c) cash reserve ratio
54.
the cash reserve ratio (crr) of scheduled banks is currently at 5.0 per
cent. while the reserve bank continues to pursue its medium-term objective of
reducing the crr to the statutory minimum level of 3.0 per cent, on a review of
the current liquidity situation, it is felt desirable to keep the present level of crr
at 5.0 per cent unchanged.
third quarter review
55.
the third quarter review of this part of the annual policy statement will
be undertaken on tuesday, january 24, 2006.

part ii. mid-term review of annual statement
on developmental and regulatory policies
for the year 2005-06
56.
the annual policy statements as well as mid-term reviews of the reserve
bank have progressively sharpened the focus on developmental and regulatory
policies to strengthen the financial system with a view to ensuring financial
stability as a prerequisite for high and stable growth. rapid changes in
technology and the impact of globalisation have necessitated prudent and
forward looking policy initiatives for the maintenance of financial stability. the
reserve bank’s approach has been to reorient its role in the context of the
evolving conditions for improving institutional soundness, strengthening the
regulatory and supervisory processes and developing the necessary legal and
technological infrastructure. while the functions of financial sector regulation and
supervision emphasise efficiency, stability and soundness of regulated entities
and markets, they also aim at developing a system that is responsive to the
needs of all sections of society. in this context, the reserve bank is continually
broadening its consultative and participative process for wider involvement of all
stakeholders in the financial system with a view to encouraging a more informed
evaluation of the underlying content of policies.
57.
in the context of entrenching financial stability in india, the mid-term
review focuses on certain key areas. first, it is essential to take adequate
measures for enhancing delivery of appropriate credit at a reasonable price.
second, there is a need to further develop financial markets and enhance the
integration of various segments of the financial markets with proper checks and
balances. third, within the emphasis assigned to credit delivery to agriculture
and the small and medium enterprise (sme) sector, developing a conducive
environment for micro-finance institutions (mfis) to cover financial services in
addition to credit requires specific attention. fourth, with a view to ensuring
financial inclusion of all segments of the population, in both rural and urban
areas, a comprehensive framework to revive the co-operative credit system,
revitalise the regional rural banks (rrbs) and reorient commercial banking
towards the credit-disadvantaged sections of society assumes high priority.
finally, in order to safeguard systemic stability, sound corporate governance
practices, sophisticated risk management techniques and implementation of
prudential measures in the financial sector in harmony with global developments
need to be focused on. in this regard, there is some merit in assessing the

prudential guidelines in the light of developments in business cycles and systems
of pricing of risks in different segments. managing risk-based capital requirement
and ensuring robustness of the risk management as well as risk-pricing systems
assume importance.
58.
the mid-term review of the annual statement on developmental and
regulatory policies for the year 2005-06 assesses the progress of measures
already taken and proposes some further measures under five sections: i.
interest rates; ii. financial markets; iii. credit delivery mechanisms; iv.
prudential measures; and v. institutional developments.
i. interest rates
interest rate policy
59.
the annual policy statement of april 2005 recognised that there is merit in
further deregulation of interest rates in those segments which have remained
regulated for reasons relevant at different stages. it proposed, however, to
continue with the status quo as various issues pertaining to regulations on
interest rates were being debated. in this context, the reserve bank constituted
an internal working group on nri deposits which submitted its report in
september 2005. furthermore, the indian banks’ association (iba) has been
requested to constitute technical groups for preparation of discussion papers on
review and deregulation of interest rate on savings bank deposits and lending
rates on small loans up to rs.2 lakh.
bplr system: review
60.
pursuant to the announcement made in the mid-term review of november
2003, the iba advised its member banks to announce a benchmark prime
lending rate (bplr), with the approval of their boards, keeping in view the
operational requirements. furthermore, banks were allowed to freely price their
loan products below or above their bplr and offer floating rate products by
using market benchmarks in a transparent manner. banks were also encouraged
to align the pricing of credit to their credit risk assessment so that both credit
delivery and quality improves.
61.
over the period, however, the system of bplr has evolved in a manner
that has not fully met these expectations. competition has forced the pricing of a
significant proportion of loans far out of alignment with bplrs and in a non-

transparent manner. as a consequence, this has undermined the role of the
bplr as a reference rate. furthermore, there is a public perception that there is
underpricing of credit for corporates while there could be overpricing of lending to
agriculture and small and medium enterprises. several requests have also been
received by the reserve bank from banks suggesting a review of the bplr
system. therefore, a need has arisen to review the current procedures and
processes of pricing of credit through a well structured and segment-wise
analysis of costs at various stages of intermediation in the whole credit cycle.
accordingly, the iba may, in consultation with its member banks, review the
bplr system afresh and issue transparent guidelines for appropriate pricing of
credit.
ii. financial markets
money market
framework for development of money market
62.
as indicated in the annual policy statement of april 2005, the report of the
technical group on money market was placed on the reserve bank’s website
for wider dissemination. a screen-based negotiated quote-driven system for all
dealings in call/notice and term money markets and an electronic trading platform
for conduct of market repo operations in government securities, in addition to the
existing voice-based system, are being developed by the clearing corporation of
india ltd. (ccil). furthermore, information on commercial paper (cp) issuance
as reported by the issuing and paying agents (ipa) on the negotiated dealing
system (nds) platform, has been made available on the reserve bank’s website
with effect from july 2005 to enhance transparency and facilitate wider
dissemination. the recommendations of the group on introduction of assetbacked commercial paper (abcp), introduction of additional intra-day laf and
optionalities in otc rupee derivatives are under examination.
government securities market
(a) central government securities market
63.
on the basis of the recommendations of the technical group on central
government securities market, the annual policy statement of april 2005
indicated that in the post-fiscal responsibility and budget management (frbm)
act period, the reserve bank will reorient government debt management

operations while simultaneously strengthening monetary operations in order to
prepare for withdrawing from primary financing of the central government’s
borrowing programme, effective april 2006. accordingly, the reserve bank has
constituted a new department named as financial markets department (fmd) in
july 2005 with a view to moving towards functional separation between debt
management and monetary operations. to begin with, the functions of the fmd
include open market operations (omo), the liquidity adjustment facility (laf),
market stabilisation scheme (mss) and standing liquidity facilities; regulation and
development of money market instruments and monitoring of money,
government securities and foreign exchange markets. the functions of the fmd
would also cover the reserve bank’s operations in the domestic foreign
exchange market, in due course, in order to achieve the desired integration with
conduct of monetary operations.
64.
the recommendations of the technical group relating to restructuring the
underwriting obligations of primary dealers (pds), allowing pds exclusivity in
primary auctions, introduction of ‘when issued market’ and limited short selling in
government securities were examined by the reserve bank in consultation with
the government. accordingly, as a first step, it is proposed:
•

to introduce intra-day short selling in government securities.
guidelines in this regard would be issued separately.

(b) operationalisation of electronic trading platform
65.
as indicated in the annual policy statement of april 2005, a screen-based
order-driven anonymous nds order matching (nds-om) module has been
operationalised in august 2005. in the first phase, the nds-om module has been
introduced for rbi-regulated nds members. by end-september 2005, 117
members were active in the module with nds-om volumes covering about twothirds of the total outright transactions in dated government securities in the
secondary market. it is now proposed:
•

to extend nds-om module to all insurance entities which are
mandated to invest in government securities. guidelines in this regard
would be issued separately.

(c) revision of wma/overdraft scheme for state governments:
status

66.
the committee on ways and means advances (wma) to state
governments (chairman: shri c. ramachandran) had recommended inter alia
that the formula and the limits of wma may be reviewed in totality after the
receipt of the recommendations of the tfc. accordingly, an advisory committee
to review the wma scheme was constituted in april 2005 (chairman: shri m.p.
bezbaruah). the committee would submit its report shortly. the report would
then be discussed with the state governments.
foreign exchange market
(a) forex market: medium-term framework
67.
as indicated in the annual policy statement of april 2005, the report of the
internal group on forex market was placed on the reserve bank’s website for
wider dissemination. the recommendations of the group, particularly those on
writing of covered options by corporates, hedging of economic risk of corporates
in respect of their domestic operations arising out of changes in the landed cost
of the imported substitutes of the commodities they consume/produce and
crystallisation of overdue export bills are under examination.
(b) external commercial borrowings: expansion
68.
currently, external commercial borrowings (ecbs) proposals of financial
institutions dealing exclusively with infrastructure or export refinance such as
infrastructure development finance company, power finance corporation,
power trading corporation, indian railway construction company and exim
bank are considered by the reserve bank on a case-by-case basis under the
approval
route.
it
is
clarified that:
•

special purpose vehicles (spvs) or any other entity notified by the
reserve bank, which are set up to finance infrastructure
companies/projects, would be treated as financial institutions and
ecbs raised by such entities would be considered under the approval
route.

69.
with a view to facilitating capacity expansion and technological
upgradation in the indian textile units after phasing out of the multi-fibre
agreement, it is proposed:
•

to allow banks to issue guarantees or standby letters of credit in
respect of ecbs raised by textile companies for modernisation or

expansion of textile units. such applications would be considered
under the approval route subject to prudential norms.
iii. credit delivery mechanisms
(a) flow of credit to agriculture
70.
it has been the endeavour of the reserve bank to improve the agricultural
credit delivery mechanism to enable banks to provide adequate and timely
finance at reasonable rates. as indicated in the annual policy statement of april
2005, most of the recommendations of the advisory committee on flow of credit
to agriculture and related activities from the banking system (chairman: prof.
v.s. vyas) have been implemented by the reserve bank and the national bank
for agriculture and rural development (nabard). a few recommendations of
the committee are under examination of the government. public sector banks
are required to formulate special agricultural credit plans (sacp) in order to
achieve distinct improvement in the flow of credit to agriculture. during 2004-05,
disbursements to agriculture by public sector banks under sacp aggregated
rs.65,218
crore
against
the
projection
of
rs.55,616
crore.
by end-june 2005, public sector banks had issued 183.5 lakh kisan credit cards
(kccs) with aggregate limits amounting to rs.62,000 crore. as announced in the
union budget for 2005-06, the rural infrastructure development fund (ridf) xi
has been established with the nabard with a corpus of rs.8,000 crore.
cumulative sanctions and disbursements till august 2005 under various tranches
of ridf (i to xi) amounted to rs.44,389 crore and rs.26,693 crore, respectively.
(b) priority sector lending
71.
it was indicated in the annual policy statement of april 2005 that
prescriptions on eligibility criteria and other aspects relating to priority sector
lending need to be reviewed and examined in depth. in this context, an internal
working group (chairman: shri c. s. murthy) was set up by the reserve bank to
review the existing policy on priority sector lending including the segments
constituting the priority sector, targets and sub-targets and recommend changes
as necessary. the draft technical paper of the group has been placed on the
reserve bank’s website for wider dissemination and comments. the technical
paper has also been sent to the government and the iba for their views.
(c) credit flow to small and medium enterprises

72.
as a sequel to the announcement made by the hon’ble finance minister
in the parliament on august 10, 2005 in regard to a policy package for stepping
up credit to small and medium enterprises, banks were advised to take action as
under:
•

units with investment in plant and machinery in excess of the small
scale industries (ssi) limit and up to rs.10 crore would be treated as
medium enterprises (me) and only ssi financing would be included in
priority sector lending.

•

banks would fix their own targets for financing the sme sector so as
to reflect a higher disbursement over the immediately preceding year,
while
the
sub-targets for financing tiny units and smaller units to the extent of
40 per cent and 20 per cent, respectively, would continue.

•

banks would initiate necessary steps to rationalise the cost of loans to
the sme sector by adopting a transparent rating system with the cost
of credit linked to the credit rating of the enterprise.

•

banks should make concerted efforts to provide credit cover, to at
least five new small/medium enterprises per year on an average, at
each of their semi urban/urban branches.

•

boards of banks would formulate liberal and comprehensive policies
for extending loans to the sme sector.

•

banks should increasingly adopt the cluster-based approach for
financing the sme sector.

•

banks would ensure presence of specialised sme branches in
identified clusters/centres with preponderance of medium enterprises
to provide sme entrepreneurs easy access to bank credit and also
equip their personnel with requisite expertise. the existing specialised
ssi branches would also be redesignated as sme branches. though
their core competence will be utilised for extending finance and other
services to the sme sector, they will also have operational flexibility to
extend finance/render other services to other sectors/borrowers.

•

policy guidelines formulated by the boards of banks, all
facilities/schemes offered by them to small entrepreneurs and
instructions/guidelines issued by the reserve bank should be
displayed on the websites of banks, the sidbi and at each bank
branch for wider dissemination and easy accessibility.

73.
the reserve bank has constituted empowered committees at its regional
offices to review the progress in sme financing and rehabilitation of sick ssi and
me units so as to ensure smooth flow of credit to these sectors. the reserve
bank has also formulated a one-time settlement scheme for recovery of nonperforming assets (npas) below rs.10 crore for sme accounts and detailed
guidelines have been issued to public sector banks for implementation. a debt
restructuring mechanism for units in the sme sector, in line with the corporate
debt restructuring (cdr) mechanism prevailing in the banking sector, has been
formulated by the reserve bank and guidelines were issued for implementation.
(d) restructuring and development of regional rural banks
74.
as indicated in the annual policy statement of april 2005, an internal
group (chairman: shri a. v. sardesai) was set up by the reserve bank to
examine various alternatives available within the existing legal framework for
strengthening regional rural banks (rrbs) and making them viable rural financial
institutions. the group submitted its report in june 2005 which has been sent to
the government for comments. the major recommendations of the group
include merger/amalgamation of rrbs to improve operational viability, change of
sponsor banks to enhance competitiveness, strengthening of balance sheets in
respect of merged entities, regulatory and supervisory strengthening, governance
and management and scope for improving profitability.
(e) micro-finance
75.
the programme of linking self-help groups (shgs) with the banking
system continues to be the major micro-finance programme in the country and is
being implemented by commercial banks, rrbs and co-operative banks. by
end-july 2005, as many as 16,53,047 shgs were linked to banks and the total
flow of credit to shgs was rs.7 ,063 crore.
76.
the following measures have been initiated to give further impetus to the
micro-finance endeavour:

•

in pursuance of the union budget, 2005-06, the micro finance
development fund (mfdf) set up in the nabard has been
redesignated as the micro finance development and equity fund
(mfdef) and its corpus has increased from rs.100 crore to rs.200
crore. the modalities in regard to the functioning of the mfdef are
being worked out.

•

the internal group (chairman: shri h.r. khan) constituted by the
reserve bank to examine issues relating to rural credit and microfinance submitted its report in july 2005 which was placed on the
reserve bank’s website for wider dissemination. important
recommendations of the group include providing comprehensive
financial services in rural areas encompassing savings, credit,
remittance, insurance and pension products and establishing linkages
between banks and external entities based on two broad models, viz.,
business facilitator model and business correspondent model. the
group has also suggested several steps to promote shgs and microfinance institutions (mfis) which include future growth of shg-bank
linkage and mfi-bank linkage programmes, utilisation of mfdef
funds to facilitate formation of shg federations for offering services
like rural housing loans, micro-insurance and tie-up with service
providers, development of accounting standards for shgs and ngos,
capacity building of mfis , rating of mfis, development of rating
models and training modules for mfis. the recommendations of the
group are under examination.

(f)

revival of rural co-operative banking institutions
and long-term co-operative credit structure

77.
the task force appointed by the government (chairman: prof. a.
vaidyanathan) to propose an action plan for reviving the rural co-operative
banking institutions and suggesting an appropriate regulatory framework for
these institutions submitted its report in february 2005. the government has
accepted the recommendations of the task force, in principle, and held
consultative meetings with the state governments. the government has
entrusted the work of studying the long-term co-operative credit structure for
agriculture and rural development to the task force.

(g) special relief measures by banks in areas
affected by natural calamities
78.
the reserve bank has issued guidelines/instructions to banks in regard to
relief measures to be provided in areas affected by natural calamities from time
to time. these guidelines cover various relief measures pertaining to credit to
existing borrowers, mainly in the agricultural sector. during recent calamities
such as tsunami, heavy rains, floods and earthquakes in some parts of the
country, a number of instances relating to functioning of atms, opening of
accounts of small customers, operations of accounts in the absence of
documents and failure of computer networks have come to the notice of the
reserve bank. accordingly, it is proposed to constitute an internal working
group to examine the whole gamut of issues and suggest suitable revisions to
the existing guidelines, with a view to making them comprehensive.
iv. prudential measures
(a) capital market exposure limits:
rationalisation
79.
as per the current norms, a bank’s aggregate exposure in all forms to the
capital market should not exceed five per cent of its total outstanding advances
(including commercial paper) as on march 31 of the previous year. within this
overall ceiling, the bank’s investment in shares, convertible bonds and
debentures and units of equity-oriented mutual funds should not exceed 20 per
cent of its net worth. on a consolidated basis, the bank’s aggregate exposure to
capital markets should not exceed two per cent of its total on-balance-sheet
assets (excluding intangible assets and accumulated losses) as on march 31 of
the previous year. within the total limit, investment in shares, convertible bonds
and debentures and units of equity-oriented mutual funds should not exceed 10
per cent of the bank’s consolidated net worth.
80.
the reserve bank has undertaken a review of the prudential limits on the
capital market exposure with a view to rationalising them in terms of base and
coverage. accordingly, it is proposed:
•

to restrict a bank’s aggregate capital market exposure to 40 per cent
of the net worth of the bank on a solo and consolidated basis.

•

to modify a bank’s consolidated direct capital market exposure to 20
per cent of the bank’s consolidated net worth.

•

to simplify and rationalise the exemptions in regard to the coverage.

81.
banks exceeding these limits either on solo or consolidated basis should
approach the reserve bank with a plan for bringing down the exposure within the
permissible limits. banks having sound internal controls and robust risk
management systems can approach the reserve bank for higher limits.
guidelines in this regard would be issued separately.
(b) prudential provisioning requirements: review
82.
in terms of the prudential guidelines, banks are required to assess their
entire loans and advances portfolio on an account-by-account basis with regard
to the degree of delinquency and classify them into four broad asset classification
categories, viz., standard, sub-standard, doubtful and loss. the standard assets
attract a uniform provisioning requirement of 0.25 per cent of the funded
outstanding on a portfolio basis. banks are required to make specific provisions
in respect of sub-standard assets at a uniform rate of 10 per cent of the funded
outstanding and for doubtful accounts at rates ranging from 20 to 100 per cent,
taking into account the period for which the account has remained nonperforming and the realisable value of security charged to the bank.
83.
traditionally, banks’ loans and advances portfolio is pro-cyclical and tends
to grow faster during an expansionary phase and grows slowly during a
recessionary phase. during times of expansion and accelerated credit growth,
there is a tendency to underestimate the level of inherent risk and the converse
holds good during times of recession. this tendency is not effectively addressed
by the above mentioned prudential specific provisioning requirements since they
capture risk ex post but not ex ante .
84.
the various options available for reducing the element of pro-cyclicality
include, among others, adoption of objective methodologies for dynamic
provisioning requirements, as is being done by a few countries, by estimating the
requirements over a business cycle rather than a year on the basis of the
riskiness of the assets, establishment of a linkage between the prudential capital
requirements and through-the-cycle ratings instead of point-in-time ratings and
establishment of a flexible loan-to-value (ltv) ratio requirements where the ltv
ratio would be directly related to the movement of asset values.
85.

taking into account the recent trends in credit growth, it is proposed:

•

to increase the general provisioning requirement for ‘standard
advances’ from the present level of 0.25 per cent to 0.40 per cent.
banks’ direct advances to agricultural and sme sectors would be
exempted from the additional provisioning requirement. as hitherto,
these provisions would be eligible for inclusion in tier ii capital for
capital adequacy purposes up to the permitted extent. operational
guidelines in this regard would be issued separately.

(c) new capital adequacy framework: status
86.
draft guidelines for implementation of the new capital adequacy
framework have been formulated and placed on the reserve bank’s website. in
line with international standards, banks were advised to adopt the standardised
approach for credit risk with effect from march 31, 2007. banks adopting the
standardised approach would use the rating assigned by only those credit rating
agencies which are identified by the reserve bank. accordingly, an in-house
group has been constituted in the reserve bank for identifying the external
rating agencies. final guidelines would be issued on the basis of the
recommendations of the group and the feedback received thereon.
87.
under the new framework, banks are required to adopt the basic
indicator approach (bia) for computing capital requirement for operational risk.
the reserve bank has issued a ‘guidance note on management of operational
risk’
in
october 2005 to facilitate a smooth transition to the new framework. banks
using bia are encouraged to comply with ‘sound practices for the management
and supervision of operational risk’ issued by the basel committee on banking
supervision (bcbs) in february 2003.
88.
the bcbs has undertaken the fifth quantitative impact study (qis-5) to
assess the impact of adoption of new capital adequacy framework. twelve
banks identified to participate in the qis-5 were advised to familiarise themselves
with the requirements of qis-5 for effective participation.
(d) capital adequacy requirements
89.
banks which have maintained regulatory capital of at least nine per cent of
the risk weighted assets for both credit risk as well as market risk in respect of
‘held for trading’ (hft) and ‘available for sale’ (afs) categories as on march 31,
2006 would be permitted to treat the entire balance in the investment fluctuation

reserve (ifr) as tier i capital. once the amount of ifr is so transferred towards
tier i capital, a headroom for raising an equal amount of tier ii capital would
become available to the eligible banks, up to half of which could be raised
through issuance of subordinated debt.
90.
in terms of the prudential guidelines on capital adequacy, banks are
required to maintain capital charge for market risk in respect of their trading book
exposures (including derivatives) and securities included under the afs category
with effect from march 31, 2005 and march 31, 2006, respectively. furthermore,
banks are required to migrate to the new capital adequacy framework with
effect from march 31, 2007. these developments would result in additional
capital requirements for banks. internationally, banks raise capital through equity
shares and instruments such as subordinated debt and preference shares which
are eligible for inclusion in tier i/tier ii/tier iii capital. banks in india, however,
do not currently have such options available except for raising tier ii capital
through subordinated debt to a limited extent. the reserve bank is examining
various types of capital instruments that can be permitted under the new capital
adequacy framework.
(e) corporate debt restructuring mechanism
91.
as mentioned in the annual policy statement of april 2005, the
performance of the corporate debt restructuring (cdr) mechanism was reviewed
and draft guidelines on cdr mechanism were placed on the reserve bank’s
website in may 2005 for wider dissemination. the changes to the existing cdr
scheme have been finalised taking into account the feedback received.
operational guidelines in this regard would be issued separately.
(f)
92.

supervisory review process

having regard to the recent trends in the credit markets it is proposed:
•

to initiate a supervisory review process with select banks having
significant exposure to some sectors, namely, real estate, highly
leveraged nbfcs, venture capital funds and capital markets, in order
to ensure that effective risk mitigants and sound internal controls are
in place for managing such exposures.

(g) financing of nbfcs

93.
as indicated in the annual policy statement of april 2005, an informal
working group (chairperson: smt. usha thorat) was constituted to examine the
issues involved in financing of nbfcs by banks and suggest ways to use the
core competencies of nbfcs in extending credit to small borrowers. the
recommendations of the group include: (i) extending bank finance to nbfcs for
permissible activities; (ii) using nbfcs as business correspondents or agents;
(iii) permitting banks to rediscount the bills discounted by nbfcs pertaining to
the transport sector; (iv) using nbfcs as a conduit for providing long-term funds
to the sme sector; and (v) extending training facilities to nbfcs engaged in
financing the ssi and agriculture sectors. the recommendations are under
examination.
(h) credit information companies
(regulation) act, 2005: status
94.
the credit information companies (regulation) act, 2005 was notified in
the gazette of india on june 23, 2005 and the government requested the
reserve bank to frame rules and regulations for implementation of the act.
accordingly, a working group (chairman: shri prashant saran) was constituted
with representatives from the reserve bank, the iba, the credit information
bureau of india ltd. (cibil) and select banks. the group, in consultation with the
ministry of law, prepared the draft rules and regulations for implementation of
the act with specific provisions for protecting individual borrower’s rights and
obligations. the draft rules and regulations are being examined by the reserve
bank.
(i)

setting up of banking codes and
standards board of india: status

95.
modalities regarding setting up of an independent banking codes and
standards board of india (bcsbi) on the model of the mechanism in the uk are
being worked out in pursuance of the annual policy statement of april 2005 in
order to ensure that a comprehensive code of conduct for fair treatment of
customers is established.
(j)

financial inclusion

96.
the annual policy statement of april 2005, while recognising the concerns
in regard to the banking practices that tend to exclude rather than attract vast
sections of population, urged banks to review their existing practices to align

them with the objective of financial inclusion. in many banks, the requirement of
minimum balance and charges levied, although accompanied by a number of
free facilities, deter a sizeable section of population from opening/maintaining
bank accounts. with a view to achieving greater financial inclusion, all banks
need to make available a basic banking ‘no frills’ account either with ‘nil’ or very
low minimum balances as well as charges that would make such accounts
accessible to vast sections of population. the nature and number of transactions
in such accounts could be restricted, but made known to the customer in
advance in a transparent manner. all banks are urged to give wide publicity to
the facility of such a ‘no-frills’ account so as to ensure greater financial inclusion.
(k) issue of co-branded debit cards by banks
97.
at present, banks are required to obtain the reserve bank’s approval for
issue of debit cards in tie-up with other non-bank entities for marketing and
distribution purposes. in order to further liberalise the procedure, it is proposed:
•

to accord general permission to banks to issue debit cards in tie-up
with non-bank entities subject to certain conditions. detailed
instructions would be issued separately.

(l)

anti-money laundering guidelines: status

98.
in recent years, prevention of money laundering has assumed importance
in international financial relationships. in this context, in november, 2004 the
reserve bank revised the guidelines on ‘know your customer’ (kyc) principles
in line with the recommendations made by the financial action task force
(fatf) on standards for anti-money laundering (aml) and combating financing
of terrorism (cft). banks were advised to frame their kyc policies with the
approval of their boards and ensure that they are compliant with its provisions by
december 31, 2005. the salient features of the policy relate to the procedure
prescribed in regard to customer acceptance, customer identification, risk
management and monitoring of transactions. the revised guidelines envisage
verification of the identity and address of the customer through independent
source documents as mandatory and banks are required to classify the accounts
according to their risk perceptions. in order to ensure that the inability of persons
belonging to low income groups to produce documents to establish their identity
and address does not lead to their financial exclusion and denial of banking
services, a simplified procedure has been provided for opening of account in

respect of those persons who do not intend to keep balances above rs.50,000
and whose total credit in one year is not expected to exceed rs.1,00,000.
v. institutional developments
payment and settlement systems
(a) electronic payment products: status and proposed action
99.
the coverage of real time gross settlement (rtgs) system has
increased significantly. as on october 19, 2005 rtgs connectivity was available
in 11,280 bank branches at 508 cities. by end-march 2006, 15,000 branches are
proposed to be covered and the number of monthly transactions of the system is
expected to expand from one lakh to two lakh.
100. the national electronic funds transfer (neft) system for electronic
transfer of funds would be implemented in phases for all networked branches of
banks all over the country. by end-december 2005, neft would be
operationalised in 34 banks. by end-june 2006, the remaining banks are
expected to be part of the system. currently, the package for operationalisation
of neft is being tested for implementation.
101. the pilot project for cheque truncation system, which aims at enhancing
efficiency in the retail cheque clearing sector, is expected to be implemented in
new delhi by end-march 2006.
102. the clearing position of banks in various clearing houses would be settled
centrally through a national settlement system (nss) in order to enable banks to
manage liquidity in an efficient and cost-effective manner. accordingly, it is
proposed to introduce nss at the four metropolitan centres by end-december
2005.
103. one of the constraints in the growth of electronic payment systems has
been the high rate of service charges being levied by banks. in this context, the
reserve bank waived service charges on banks for both electronic clearing
service (ecs) and electronic fund transfer (eft) transactions up to march 31,
2006 with a view to promoting eft and encouraging ecs. furthermore, no
service charge is being levied for rtgs transactions since its commencement
and this waiver is also valid up to march 31, 2006. as electronic payment
systems facilitate straight-through processing and are cost-effective in the long

run, banks are encouraged to review service charges being levied on such
transactions.
(b) umbrella organisation for retail
payment systems: progress
104. the vision document for payment and settlement systems, 2005-2008
envisages establishment of an institutional structure owned by banks and other
financial institutions for retail payment systems. the objective of setting up of
such an organisation is to optimise the use of resources through consolidation of
the existing infrastructure and by building up of new infrastructure. the iba
constituted
a
working
group
with
12 banks as its members to study the proposal. the working group has
recommended setting up of a company under section 25 of the companies act,
1956 which would be owned and operated by banks. the recommendations are
under consideration of the iba and the new organisation is likely to get
operational with effect from april 1, 2006.
(c) business continuity plan: contingency plan
105. in the recent past, usage of information technology (it) has increased
significantly. with increasing migration to centralised systems, provision for
effective back-up and business continuity plans assumes importance. in this
context, the reserve bank has drawn up a disaster recovery plan for all critical
applications including rtgs, the performance of which is tested at quarterly
intervals.
106. furthe rmore, there is a need for banks to ensure that their plans for
business continuity are adequate and comprehensive which could resume
business functionalities quickly in a situation of disaster to transact normal
business. banks are, therefore, urged to test their business continuity plans
periodically and ensure continuous service.
information technology
financial sector technology vision document
107. as indicated in the annual policy statement of april 2005, the financial
sector technology vision document was placed on the reserve bank’s website
in july 2005. the vision document has enumerated the initiatives to be
undertaken by the reserve bank in the medium-term in order to ensure
maintenance of overall systemic efficiency of the financial sector. in this context,

the document has identified four key areas for information technology (it)
development: regulation and supervision, role of the institute for development
and research in banking technology (idrbt) to augment technology
absorption, the financial sector and government related functions. banks are
required to ensure that the policy perspectives of the reserve bank integrate
seamlessly with the approaches followed by them with appropriate focus on
corporate governance.
urban co-operative banks
(a) vision document for ucbs: medium-term framework
108. a medium-term framework for urban co-operative banks (ucbs) is being
developed on the basis of feedback received on the draft ‘vision document for
urban co-operative banks’. as the ucbs are subject to dual control by the
reserve bank and state governments, the vision document envisaged
harmonisation of their approaches for facilitating the development of the sector.
accordingly, the reserve bank has signed a memorandum of understanding
(mou) with three state governments, viz., andhra pradesh, gujarat and
karnataka, and is in the process of entering into mous with other states having
sizeable presence of ucbs. the mou envisages drawing up of an action plan
through state level task forces on ucbs for revival of weak ucbs. it provides
for a structured arrangement for coordination and consultation as well as
professionalisation of management of ucbs. the draft vision document also
envisages that facilities and opportunities available to commercial banks should,
as far as possible, also be made available to ucbs other than unit and single
district banks with deposits less than rs.100 crore. accordingly, it is proposed:
•

to extend currency chest facility and issuance of licence to conduct
foreign exchange business (authorised person licence) to scheduled
ucbs registered under the multi-state co-operative societies act and
under the state acts where the state governments concerned have
assured regulatory coordination by entering into mou with the
reserve bank. the eligibility norms for these facilities would be
notified separately.

(b) merger/amalgamation of ucbs

109. guidelines on merger/amalgamation in the ucb sector were issued by the
reserve bank with a view to facilitating emergence of strong entities and for
providing an avenue for non-disruptive exit of unviable entities. the major focus
of the guidelines is on the financial aspects of the merger/amalgamation
proposals with a view to protecting depositors’ interests and avoiding systemic
problems. so far, the reserve bank has conveyed ‘no objection’ to five merger
proposals out of which two proposals have already materialised. in order to
further smoothen the process of merger in the ucb sector, it is proposed:
•

to permit the acquirer ucb to amortise the losses taken over from the
acquired ucb over a period of not more than five years, including the
year of merger.

(c) 90 days norm for ucbs: relaxation
110. the reserve bank has relaxed the 90 days delinquency norm for certain
categories of ucbs on requests received from the ucb sector regarding difficulty
in meeting the norm. accordingly, unit banks (i.e., having a single branch/head
office) as well as banks having multiple branches within a single district with
deposits up to rs.100 crore would classify their loan accounts as npas based on
the 180 days delinquency norm instead of the extant 90 days norm. the
relaxation would be valid up to end-march 2007 to enable the ucbs concerned
to build up adequate provisions and strengthen their procedures in order to
transit to the 90 days delinquency norm within the stipulated period.
(d) restructuring of weak scheduled ucbs
111. the reserve bank has begun a consultative process for revitalisation and
rehabilitation of weak scheduled ucbs. in this context, 10 weak scheduled ucbs
are in the process of restructuring and the reserve bank is closely monitoring
their progress.
the right to information act, 2005
112. the government has enacted the right to information act, 2005 on june
15, 2005. pursuant to its enactment, the reserve bank has designated the chief
general manager-in-charge of the department of administration and personnel
management as the chief public information officer. details of the scheme

regarding implementation of the provisions of the act have been placed on the
reserve bank’s website.
computation of exchange rate indices - new series
113. as part of its policy of communication and to aid researchers and analysts,
the reserve bank has recently updated its 5-country and 36-country indices of
nominal effective exchange rates (neer) and real effective exchange rates
(reer).
the
5-country indices have been replaced by new 6-currency indices of reer and
neer. the new indices would include two new currencies, both asian - the
chinese renminbi and the hong kong dollar. two currencies in the existing 5country series, viz., french franc and deutsche mark would be replaced by the
euro. the new indices use 3-year moving average trade weights in place of the
fixed trade weights in the 5-country indices. the new series would be published
in the december 2005 issue of the reserve bank of india bulletin along with
information on methodological and computational details. simultaneously, the
broader 36-country indices of neer and reer with 1985 as the base year will
be updated to 1993-94 as the base year and revisions would be carried out in the
weighting pattern. these revised computations are aimed to reflect the changing
profile of india’s foreign trade.
mumbai
october 25, 2005

