Statement by Dr. Bimal Jalan, Governor,
Reserve Bank of India on Monetary and Credit
Policy for the year 2002-03
The Statement consists of three parts: (I) Review of Macroeconomic and
Monetary Developments during 2001-02, (II) Stance of Monetary Policy for 2002-03,
and (III) Financial Sector Reforms and Monetary Policy Measures.

2.

Like last year, a technical and analytical review of macroeconomic and monetary

developments is being issued as a separate document. This document provides the
necessary macroeconomic and other information in somewhat greater detail with the help
of simple charts and tables.

I. Review of Macroeconomic and Monetary
Developments: 2001-02
Domestic Developments
3.

Recently, the Central Statistical Organisation (CSO) released revised figures for

national income growth for the year 2000-01. According to the latest estimates, the
growth rate of GDP was substantially lower than earlier estimated, mainly due to
downward revision in the growth rate of the services sector. While the growth rate of the
services sector was revised downwards from 7.5 per cent to 5.0 per cent, that of
agriculture and allied activities was revised from 0.2 per cent to (-) 0.2 per cent. On the
other hand, industrial sector growth was revised upwards from 5.3 per cent to 6.2 per
cent. As a result, overall GDP growth during 2000-01 was placed at 4.0 per cent on a
revised basis as against 5.2 per cent estimated earlier.

4.

During 2001-02, according to preliminary estimates by the CSO the growth in

agricultural sector is expected to be buoyant at about 5.7 per cent as against a negative
growth of 0.2 per cent in the previous year. However, the overall growth performance of
the industrial sector at 3.3 per cent is estimated to be lower than that of 6.2 per cent in the
previous year. Combined with a reasonable performance of the services sector, estimated

2
to grow by 6.2 per cent mainly on account of trade and transport, finance and business
services, the CSO in its latest estimates has projected real GDP growth in 2001-02 at 5.4
per cent as compared with 4.0 per cent in 2000-01. This is consistent with the rate of
growth between 5.0 and 6.0 per cent indicated by RBI in the Mid-term Review of
October 2001.
5.

The domestic inflationary situation during 2001-02 was highly favourable. The

annual rate of inflation, on a point-to-point basis, as measured by variations in the
wholesale price index (WPI) (base: 1993-94 = 100) declined from 4.9 per cent in endMarch 2001 to 1.4 per cent by end-March 2002. Inflation on account of manufactured
products (weight: 63.7) registered a decline of 0.4 per cent as compared with an increase
of 3.8 per cent in the previous year reflecting sluggish conditions in industrial sector.
Primary articles (weight: 22.0) showed an increase of 3.8 per cent as against a decline of
0.4 per cent last year. The moderation in inflation rate has been largely on account of
much lower increase of 3.8 per cent in ‘fuel, power, light and lubricants’ group (weight:
14.2) in contrast to 15.0 per cent increase a year ago. The base effect of higher oil prices
last year is apparent, as annual inflation measured by increase in WPI on an average
basis, worked out to 3.6 per cent as against 7.2 per cent a year ago. Inflation, as reflected
by the consumer price index (CPI) was higher on a point-to-point basis (5.2 per cent) as
well as on an average basis (4.1 per cent) up to February 2002. Comparative figures for
the previous year were 3.0 per cent and 4.0 per cent, respectively.
6.

During 2001-02, the annual growth in money supply (M3) was in line with the

projected trajectory at 14.0 per cent (Rs.1,83,912 crore) as against 16.8 per cent
(Rs.1,89,046 crore) a year ago. Among the components, the growth in aggregate deposits
of scheduled commercial banks at 14.3 per cent was lower than that of 18.4 per cent in
the previous year during which deposits were augmented by India Millennium Deposit
inflows. The expansion in currency with the public was higher at 15.2 per cent
(Rs.31,890 crore) as against 10.8 per cent (Rs.20,468 crore) in the previous year. This
could partly be attributed to higher agricultural activity and larger procurement of
foodgrains.

3
7.

The increase in reserve money during 2001-02 at 11.4 per cent (Rs. 34,514 crore)

was higher than that of 8.1 per cent (Rs.22,757 crore) in the previous year. It is
interesting to note that the expansion in reserve money was entirely on account of the
increase in net foreign exchange assets of RBI which rose by 33.9 per cent (Rs. 66,794
crore) as compared with 18.9 per cent (Rs.31,295 crore) in 2000-01. On the other hand,
unlike in the past, net domestic assets of RBI declined on account of both net RBI credit
to the Central Government as well as credit to the commercial sector. Notwithstanding
RBI’s subscription to fresh government dated securities of Rs.28,892 crore, net RBI
credit to the Central Government declined by 0.3 per cent (- Rs.506 crore) due to open
market sales of government securities of Rs.30,335 crore. RBI’s claims on banks and
commercial sector also showed a decline of Rs.9,575 crore reflecting comfortable
liquidity available with them.

8.

During 2001-02, non-food credit registered a lower growth of 12.8 per cent

(Rs.60,411 crore) as against an increase of 14.9 per cent (Rs.61,176 crore) in the previous
year reflecting deceleration in industrial production. The increase in total flow of funds
from scheduled commercial banks to the commercial sector during 2001-02 including
banks’ investments in bonds/debentures/shares of public sector undertakings and private
corporate sector, commercial paper, etc. was also lower at 12.0 per cent (Rs.65,862 crore)
as against 16.1 per cent (Rs.75,791 crore) in the previous year. Total flow of resources to
the commercial sector, including capital issues, global depository receipts (GDRs) and
borrowing from financial institutions was Rs.1,37,429 crore as compared with
Rs.1,71,928 crore in the previous year.
9.

The increase in food credit at Rs.13,987 crore during 2001-02 was similar

compared with Rs.14,300 crore in the previous year reflecting large scale procurement
operations. The buffer stock of foodgrains rose to 54.5 million tonnes by end-February
2002 from 46.8 million tonnes in end-February 2001. The carrying costs of holding large
buffer stocks beyond an optimal level need to be carefully considered, keeping in view
the fact that the outstanding food procurement credit of scheduled commercial banks was
as high as Rs.53,978 crore by March 2002.

4

10.

As per the revised estimates in the Budget 2002-03, the fiscal deficit of the

Central Government for 2001-02 was placed at Rs.1,31,721 crore as against the budget
estimate of Rs.1,16,314 crore. During the financial year 2001-02, net market borrowings
of the Central Government at Rs. 92,302 crore (gross Rs. 1,33,801 crore), exceeded the
budget estimates by Rs. 14,949 crore and was higher by Rs.822 crore over the revised
estimate. The State Governments’ net market borrowings have also increased by Rs.
4,404 crore from the earlier budgeted level of Rs. 12,857 crore. Although the combined
slippage in the borrowings of the Centre and States by as much as Rs. 19,353 crore did
not exert undue pressure on interest rates because of availability of ample liquidity and
depressed credit demand, as emphasised in the Budget speech for 2002-03, there is an
urgent need to contain fiscal deficit to improve the task of monetary and debt
management from a medium-term perspective.

11.

As emphasised in various policy Statements, the overall monetary management

becomes difficult when a large and growing borrowing programme of the Government,
year after year, puts pressure on the absorptive capacity of the market. Already, the
banking system holds government securities of more than 36.5 per cent of its net demand
and time liabilities as against the statutory minimum requirement of 25.0 per cent. In
terms of volume, such holdings above the statutory liquidity ratio (SLR) amounted to
more than Rs.1,40,300 crore, which is higher than the gross borrowings of the
Government. Such a large exposure to government securities may inhibit the ability of
banks to meet the credit requirements of the productive sectors of the economy, if there is
a significant pick-up in demand during the current year. Further, the sustainability of
public debt is now a matter of concern, given the increasing interest payments. The
reduction in fiscal deficit would impart flexibility to the interest rate regime and, in turn,
release government resources for the much needed investment in physical and social
infrastructure. Further, fiscal consolidation will also have a favourable effect on
inflationary expectations in the economy.

5
12.

It was indicated in the annual policy Statement of April 2001, and reiterated in the

Mid-term Review of October 2001 that RBI is committed to maintain adequate liquidity
in the market with preference for softening of interest rates to the extent the evolving
situation warrants. To this end, despite the high level of government borrowing
programme during 2001-02, it was possible to maintain adequate liquidity and a softer
interest rate environment without engendering inflationary conditions in the economy.
This is evidenced from the fact that the primary market yields on 91-day and 364-day
Treasury Bills came down by as much as 262 basis points and 280 basis points,
respectively. Simultaneously, the call money rate and weighted average discount rate of
CP declined by 156 basis points and 153 basis points, respectively, during the course of
the year.

13.

There was also a perceptible downward shift in secondary market yields on

government securities across the maturity spectrum during the year. The yield on
government securities with 1-year residual maturity moderated from 9.05 per cent in
March 2001 to 6.10 per cent by March 2002 indicating a reduction in yield by as much as
295 basis points. Similarly, the yield on government securities with 10-year residual
maturity had declined by 287 basis points to 7.36 per cent by March 2002 from 10.23 per
cent in March 2001. These are among the sharpest reductions in interest rates during the
course of a year in the last three decades. However, it needs to be recognised that it may
not be possible to reduce the cost of borrowing in the face of higher market borrowings,
year after year, particularly when credit demand picks up.
14.

In this context, it may be mentioned that while the yields on government

securities have declined sharply, those on non-government bonds have witnessed a lower
reduction resulting in widening of the spread between these two categories of fixed
income securities. Illustratively, the spread between the prime-rated CP and 91-day
Treasury Bills widened from 82 basis points in end-March 2001 to 202 basis points by
end-March 2002. This could be attributed to greater preference of investors, particularly
the banking sector, to seek high quality securities in the face of sluggish growth of
industrial sector. The “flight to quality” has been so strong that the yield rate on 10-year

6
government securities had fallen by 287 basis points to reach 7.36 per cent as at endMarch 2002. On the other hand, the reduction in deposit rates has been less pronounced
with the term deposit rates of public sector banks moving down from a range of 4.0-10.5
per cent for various maturities in March 2001 to 4.25-8.75 per cent by March 2002.

15.

The term structure of interest rates reveals that the long-term interest rates have

declined more sharply than the short-term rates. For example, in the government
securities market, the spread between the yields on 10-year government securities and 91day Treasury Bills narrowed down from 237 basis points at end-April 2001 to 123 basis
points by end-March 2002. While the tenor spread in the government securities market
has narrowed reflecting, inter alia, moderation of inflationary expectations, the term
spread between highly rated corporate paper and government securities has widened. For
example, the spread between AAA rated 5-year corporate bonds and the yield on
government securities of equal residual maturity widened from about 65 basis points in
end-April 2001 to about 177 basis points by end-March 2002 reflecting, inter alia, an
increase in investor preference for sovereign paper.
16.

It is necessary to impart greater flexibility to interest rate structure in India

consistent with the underlying macroeconomic conditions. Further progress in this
direction could be made if banks move over to a variable interest rate structure on longer
term deposits as early as possible. Since interest rates could vary in both directions,
depending on the phase of business cycle and inflationary outlook, a variable interest rate
regime on long-term deposits does not necessarily imply lowering of the average interest
rate earned by depositors over a period of time (compared with a fixed rate regime, which
favours old deposits over new deposits when interest rates are coming down, and vice
versa when rates are moving in the opposite direction). In addition, banks need to reduce
their operating costs over time by improving productivity and increasing their volume of
lending. This should be possible with proper upgradation of technology in areas which, at
present, are contributing to higher costs.
17.

In view of the easy liquidity conditions and softer interest rate environment, the

overall monetary conditions are at present reasonably comfortable. However, experience

7
of recent years once again confirms that monetary management has now become much
more complex than was the case even a few years ago. This is because of several factors,
such as the on-going integration of financial markets across the world, the phenomenal
increase in financial turnover, liberalisation of the economy, and the rapidity with which
unanticipated domestic and international tremors get transmitted to financial markets
across the world because of the new technology.

18.

It may be recalled that at the beginning of 2001-02, the Reserve Bank had taken

steps to ease monetary policy. However, adverse external developments post-September
11 and their effect on financial markets in India necessitated a quick response to provide
assurance and stabilise domestic financial markets without tightening monetary
conditions. Fortunately, these measures succeeded in stabilising financial conditions
without calling for a reversal in the monetary stance. The need for proactive
countercyclical policy in the light of emerging situation has also been the experience of
other monetary authorities, including the US and European central banks.

19.

It is important to emphasise this since, in case the present economic

circumstances change, it may again become necessary to take appropriate monetary
measures, which may not be in consonance with the present easy liquidity conditions.
Keeping these realities in view, it is particularly important for banks and financial
institutions to make adequate provisions for unforeseen contingencies in their business
plans, and fully take into account the implications of changes in the monetary and
external environment on their operations. In this context, in January 2002, RBI proposed
that banks should build up investment fluctuation reserve (IFR) to a minimum of 5.0
per cent of their investment portfolio by transferring the gains realised on sale of
investments within a period of five years. Banks are, however, free to build up higher
percentage of IFR of up to 10.0 per cent of their portfolio depending on the size and
composition of their portfolio, with the concurrence of their Board of Directors. Now that
the government security prices are high, it may be the opportune time for banks to build
up IFR.

8
External Developments
20.

While the world economy had slowed down considerably during the first half of

the year 2001, the expectation of revival was modest for the second half. The
recessionary trends were compounded by the adverse impact of September 11 events on
services and trade. In addition, all segments of the financial market, particularly the
equity markets, were badly affected. The impact was also felt in the financial markets of
the emerging market economies, as there was a shift away from risky assets. These
uncertainties prompted the IMF to sharply scale down its growth projection for the global
economy to 2.4 per cent, which is almost half of the level of growth recorded in 2000.
Fortunately, in recent weeks, the outlook for a recovery in the world economy,
particularly in the US, has become much better. This has now prompted the IMF to
upgrade its growth projection for the global economy for 2002 to 2.8 per cent from the
earlier projection of 2.4 per cent in December 2001. The volume growth in world trade is
also likely to be better in 2002 than that in 2001. Coupled with the positive effects of
decline in global inflation and interest rates, the prospects for turnaround in world
economic growth now appear distinctly more favourable than was the case a couple of
months ago. With easing of uncertainties, stabilisation of confidence and improvements
in financing conditions, the risks to global economic outlook is now more balanced
barring the recent volatility in international oil prices which continues to be a matter of
concern.

21.

International developments, consequent to the events of September 11, had their

destabilising impact on Indian financial markets with a sharp decline in the equity prices
and net capital outflows of foreign institutional investors. Foreign exchange market also
became volatile with the rupee depreciating vis-à-vis US dollar and consequent
uncertainties also affected the government securities market. However, RBI promptly
announced its intention to provide appropriate liquidity and initiated several measures so
as to stabilise domestic financial markets. These actions by RBI restored stability and
confidence in financial markets, which were reflected in the quick return of these markets
to normal conditions.

9

22.

Despite adverse external developments, India’s foreign exchange reserves

continued to record a healthy growth during 2001-02 due to moderation in trade deficit
and strong capital and other inflows. Foreign exchange reserves increased by as much as
US $ 11.8 billion from US $ 42.3 billion in end-March 2001 to US $ 54.1 billion by endMarch 2002. Of these, foreign currency assets increased by US $ 11.5 billion. This is the
highest increase recorded in a single year and is an evidence of strong domestic and
international confidence in India’s management of its balance of payments in the post1991 period. Reflecting this confidence, in the last four years since the East Asian crisis
of 1997-98, India’s foreign exchange reserves have more than doubled despite substantial
increase in oil imports during the period and several other unfavourable developments
affecting the prospects of developing countries.

23.

India’s sustained efforts to build an adequate level of foreign exchange reserves

have been vindicated by global uncertainties. It is now widely agreed that in judging the
adequacy of reserves in emerging economies, it is not enough to relate the size of
reserves to the quantum of merchandise imports or the size of the current account deficit.
The overall approach to the management of India’s foreign exchange reserves in recent
years has, therefore, reflected the changing composition of balance of payments. In
addition to the likely developments in the current account, the reserve management has
also endeavoured to reflect the liquidity risks associated with different types of flows
and other requirements. The policy for reserve management is thus judiciously built upon
a host of identifiable factors and other contingencies. Such factors, inter alia, include: the
size of the current account deficit; the size of short-term liabilities (including current
repayment obligations on long-term loans); the possible variability in portfolio
investments and other types of capital flows; the unanticipated pressures on the balance
of payments arising out of external shocks (such as the impact of the East Asian crisis of
1997-98 or increase in oil prices during 1999-2001); and movements in the repatriable
foreign currency deposits of non-resident Indians. A sufficiently high level of reserves is
necessary to ensure that even if there is prolonged uncertainty, reserves can cover the

10
“liquidity at risk” on all accounts over a fairly long period. Taking these considerations
into account, India’s foreign exchange reserves are now very comfortable.

24.

The prevalent national security environment further underscores the need for

strong reserves. We must continue to ensure that, leaving aside short-term variations in
reserves level, the quantum of reserves in the long-run is in line with the growth of the
economy, the size of risk-adjusted capital flows and national security requirements. This
will provide us with greater security against unfavourable or unanticipated developments,
which can occur quite suddenly.

25.

India’s exports have not done well last year largely on account of global

slowdown exacerbated by the September 11 events which affected export of services.
The growth rate of exports in US dollar terms decelerated to 0.05 per cent during 2001-02
(April-February) as compared with 20.6 per cent in the corresponding period of the
previous year. In view of enlargement in domestic refining capacity, increase in oil
exports (by 12.7 per cent) have emerged as a significant item of export growth. Non-oil
exports, on the other hand, declined by 0.5 per cent as against an increase of 15.7 per cent
in the previous year. The growth of imports showed an increase of 2.1 per cent as
compared with 1.6 per cent in the corresponding period of the previous year reflecting
lower oil imports emanating from moderation in international oil prices. While oil
imports registered a decline of 11.9 per cent as against an increase of 55.0 per cent in the
previous year, non-oil imports increased by 8.7 per cent as compared with a decline of
12.6 per cent in the corresponding period of the previous year. At a further disaggregated
level, non-oil imports excluding gold and silver increased by 6.3 per cent during 2001-02
(April-December) in contrast to a decline of 6.4 per cent in the corresponding period of
the previous year. As a result of deceleration in exports, the trade deficit widened to US $
6.7 billion during 2001-02 (April-February) from US $ 5.8 billion in the corresponding
period of the previous year.
26.

It was announced in the annual policy Statement of April 2001 that a survey

would be conducted through an independent outside agency in order to have a feedback

11
on simplification of procedures by RBI for export credit delivery as also the level of
exporters’ satisfaction with bank services. Accordingly, the work of the survey was
entrusted to National Council of Applied Economic Research (NCAER), New Delhi.
NCAER has since submitted its report. The results of the survey reflect positive
responses to RBI’s initiatives in improving the credit delivery system to exporters. More
than three-fourths of exporters were satisfied with overall bank services relating to export
credit delivery. Nearly one-fourth of exporters perceived them as “excellent” and more
than half as “good”. The only exception is the eastern region where only 12 per cent
perceived them as “excellent” and less than half as “good”. The report also made some
suggestions for improving the credit delivery to exporters which are being examined by
RBI. Summary of the report will be sent to banks for consideration and necessary action.
It is also proposed to release the report for public information. The results of this survey
will be useful for bringing about further improvements in bank services to exporters.

27.

Reflecting comfortable supply position, the foreign exchange market generally

exhibited stable conditions during 2001-02 barring some instances of volatility arising
out of occasional uncertainties in market sentiments. The foreign exchange market
witnessed brief periods of uncertainty in May 2001 on account of pressure on oil prices
and downgrading of sovereign outlook; deceleration in capital inflows following
September 11 events; and again in December 2001 due to terrorist attack on Indian
Parliament and border tension. While the rupee depreciated against the US dollar during
the year, it showed a mixed trend against other major currencies such as, Japanese Yen,
Euro and Pound Sterling.

28.

In the European Monetary Union, Euro, as a single currency, came into being

with effect from January 1, 1999. As a preparatory measure, RBI, on November 20, 1998
had notified Euro as a permissible transaction currency under FERA and advised banks to
accept FCNR (B) deposits in euro and convert existing deposits to euro freely besides
balances in Exchange Earners’ Foreign Currency (EEFC) and Resident Foreign Currency
accounts. Banks were given freedom to use Euribor and Eurolibor as benchmarks for
pricing their foreign exchange transactions. At the instance of RBI, FEDAI conducted a

12
training programme for bankers to familiarise them with the procedure of handling euro
notes/coins. In the wake of smooth transition to euro notes and coins from January 1,
2002, RBI instructed Authorised Dealers (ADs) and full-fledged money changers to make
arrangements to display euro exchange rates for travellers’ cheques and currency notes
and extend facilities to residents for conversion of legacy currencies to euro till January
31, 2002 and even after this date by banks and money changers having the necessary
arrangements in place for realising the value of legacy currencies. RBI also provided
necessary information on euro on its website and started announcing reference rate for
euro in addition to US dollar.

29.

Another major development in this area is that the Government of India has since

given the option to RBI to use euro as intervention currency in addition to US dollar.
Furthermore, Hyderabad and Nagpur have been included as new centres for sale and
purchase of US dollar and euro.

30.

It may be recalled that in the annual policy Statement of April 1998, soon after the

Asian crisis, RBI had highlighted the need for caution in the management of the
exchange rate in emerging economies. It was observed that: “all countries, and
developing countries in particular, have to be constantly watchful of developments that
may adversely affect exchange markets. There can be no room for complacency in this
regard”. It was further reiterated in the Mid-term Review of October 1998 that: “RBI will
continue to closely monitor developments in the financial markets at home and abroad,
and take such monetary and administrative actions as may be considered necessary from
time to time. RBI will not hesitate to use its reserves, when warranted, to meet sharp dayto-day supply-demand imbalances in the market. As before, it will ensure that lumpy and
uneven demand, particularly for oil imports and debt servicing obligations of the
Government, does not cause any disturbance in the orderly functioning of foreign
exchange market”.

31.

Subsequent international developments have further underscored the need for

careful management of the exchange rate in order to maintain orderly conditions in the

13
markets (without, however, targeting a specific level). An important reason for this
conclusion was highlighted in the Mid-term Review of October 2000 which observed
that: “ in the very short-run, “expectations” about the likely behaviour of a currency next
day or over a week or fortnight can play a major role in determining its movement against
foreign currencies, particularly the US dollar. Given the “bandwagon” effect of any
adverse movements, and the herd behaviour of market participants, expectations can
often become self-fulfilling. This is particularly true of thin developing country markets,
where net volumes are relatively small. The day-to-day movement in currency markets is
further complicated by volatility in private capital flows, which are highly sensitive to
short-term domestic and international developments as well as future expectations”.

32.

Another important reason for a vigil on exchange rate is the likely effect of

adverse developments in forex market on the real economy, as has been seen in several
East Asian and Latin American countries a couple of years ago, and in Turkey and
Argentina recently. The “contagion” effect is quick, and a sharp change in the currency
value can affect the real economy more than proportionately. Exporters may suffer if
there is unanticipated sharp appreciation and debtors or other corporates may be affected
badly if there is a sharp depreciation, which can also lead to bank failures and
bankruptcies.

33.

Against the above background, India’s exchange rate policy of focusing on

managing volatility with no fixed rate target, while allowing the underlying demand and
supply conditions to determine the exchange rate movements over a period in an orderly
way, has stood the test of time. Despite several unexpected external and domestic
developments, India’s external situation continues to remain highly satisfactory. RBI will
continue to follow the same approach of watchfulness, caution and flexibility while
dealing with the forex market. It is a matter of satisfaction that the recent international
research on viable exchange rate strategies in emerging markets has lent considerable
support to the exchange rate policy followed by India. A number of countries (including
those in East Asia) are now following similar policies.

14
34.

In the past two years, a number of changes have been introduced in various

schemes for remittances, investment and maintenance of bank accounts by non-resident
Indians (NRIs). Continuing with the policy of liberalisation of the capital account,
following the announcement made in the Budget 2002-03, the Reserve Bank has
implemented the following measures:
?

With a view to providing full convertibility on non-resident deposit schemes, nonresident non-repatriable (NRNR) account and non-resident special rupee (NRSR)
account schemes were discontinued with effect from April 1, 2002. Banks would
not accept any deposit, whether by way of renewal of existing deposits or
otherwise under these two schemes with effect from April 1, 2002. Existing
accounts under NRNR scheme, however, may be continued up to the date of
maturity. On maturity of the existing deposits under the NRNR scheme, the
maturity proceeds shall be credited to the account holder’s non-resident (external)
account (NRE account), after giving notice to the account holder. Similarly, the
existing accounts in the form of term deposits under NRSR scheme may be
continued till the date of maturity. On maturity, the maturity proceeds shall be
credited to the account holder’s non-resident (ordinary) account (NRO account).
Existing NRSR accounts, other than term deposits, would not be continued after
September 30, 2002 and may, at the option of the account holders, be closed or
the balance therein credited to their NRO accounts on or before that date.

?

Existing limits for Indian direct investment outside India under automatic route
has been raised from US $ 50 million in a financial year to US $ 100 million.
Such Indian investors could now purchase foreign exchange up to 50 per cent of
their net worth as on the date of last audited balance sheet as against the existing
limit of 25 per cent.

?

Corporate borrowers are allowed to prepay ECBs to the extent of the balances in
their EEFC accounts, with the approval of RBI. Corporates which are exportoriented units and others can credit up to 70 per cent and 50 per cent, respectively,
of their foreign exchange earnings to their EEFC accounts. RBI has since decided
to allow the corporates to credit higher than the above percentage of export

15
proceeds to their EEFC accounts on a case-by-case basis to enable them to take
advantage of lower interest rates and prepay their ECBs.
?

It has been decided to allow Indian corporates with proven track record to
contribute funds from their foreign exchange earnings for setting up Chairs in
educational institutions abroad, and for similar such purposes. Such cases will be
considered by RBI on a case-by-case basis.

?

RBI had issued a notification in September 2001 permitting Indian companies to
raise the 24 per cent limit on Foreign Institutional Investors’ (FIIs) investment to
the sectoral cap/statutory ceiling as applicable. As announced by the Finance
Minister in his Budget speech for 2002-03, FII portfolio investments will not be
subject to sectoral limits for foreign direct investment except in specified sectors.
The details of sectors and the limits applicable will be specified by the
Government in due course.

?

NRIs will be able to repatriate their current income in India such as rent, dividend,
pension, interest, etc. by submitting a certificate from their chartered accountant
certifying that the amount proposed to be remitted is eligible for remittance and
that applicable taxes have been paid/provided for.

?

Indian mutual funds will be allowed to invest in rated securities in countries with
fully convertible currencies, within the existing limits. Earlier such investment
was only permitted in ADRs/GDRs issued by Indian companies in overseas
markets.

?

With a view to further liberalise capital account transactions, it has been decided
to put the limit for Foreign Currency Convertible Bond (FCCB) scheme under the
automatic route up to US $ 50 million.

35.

The Reserve Bank, as a part of the consultative process, constituted various

working groups on relevant policy subjects with the participation of bankers, market
participants and experts. Working groups were also set up for suggesting road maps for
implementation of international best systems and practices in the financial system in
general and banking sector in particular. The reports of the working groups were
examined internally and, as necessary, these were also put on the RBI website for wider

16
dissemination and comments. The details of the progress made in respect of certain
working groups constituted recently are given in the Annexure to this Statement.

II. Stance of Monetary Policy for 2002-03
36.

The overall stance of monetary policy in 2001-02, as outlined in last year’s annual

policy Statement, was as follows:
?

Provision of adequate liquidity to meet credit growth and support revival of
investment demand while continuing a vigil on movements in the price level.

?

Within the overall framework of imparting greater flexibility to the interest rate
regime in the medium-term, to continue the present stable interest rate
environment with a preference for softening to the extent the evolving situation
warrants.

The monetary management in 2001-02 was largely in conformity with the monetary
policy stance announced in annual policy Statement of April 2001 and reiterated in the
Mid-term Review of October 2001. However, the monetary management in 2001-02 was
fraught with several challenges like overhang of liquidity, global slowdown, external
developments after September 11 and the tense situation on the borders.

37.

As spelt out in the Mid-term Review of October 2001, RBI has been able to

maintain stable interest rate regime throughout the year with a bias towards further
softening of the interest rates. The yields on government securities in the secondary
market ruled much lower than the yields at the beginning of the financial year. The large
market borrowing programme of the Government could be completed at a lower cost
without unduly affecting the general interest rates.

38.

Though there have been substantial lendable resources with banks due to

reduction in the Cash Reserve Ratio (CRR) and prevalence of soft interest rate regime, as
mentioned earlier, non-food credit off-take has not picked up to a desirable extent due to
low level of economic activity in general, which is evident from the decelerated growth
in industrial production.

17

39.

During the last quarter of 2001-02, a pick-up in the non-food credit has been

observed which is expected to continue. Further, benign inflation, good agricultural
prospects, and signs of recovery, though incipient, in the US and euro-zone should help
the process of recovery in our economy. Agricultural recovery should increase rural
demand for both durable and non-durable goods. The global recovery should also help
our exports, specifically in software and knowledge-based industries. As such, it is
anticipated that the demand for credit is likely to increase in the current year.

40.

During 2001-02, forex market showed considerable stability without any undue

pressure on exchange rate. As pointed out in the previous Section, India’s exchange rate
policy of focusing on managing volatility with no fixed rate target, while allowing the
underlying demand and supply conditions to determine the exchange rate movements
over a period in an orderly way, has stood the test of time. Despite several unexpected
external and domestic developments, India’s external situation has remained highly
satisfactory. RBI will continue to follow the same approach of watchfulness, caution and
flexibility in regard to the forex market. Barring major unforeseen global development,
RBI will also continue to ensure that, leaving aside short-term variations in reserve
levels, the quantum of reserves in the long-run is in line with the growth rate in the
economy, the share of external sector in the economy, and the size of the risk-adjusted
capital flows. It is heartening to note that our system of exchange rate and reserve
management now commands increasing international acceptance.

41.

The fiscal deficit of the Central Government which was budgeted at 4.7 per cent

of GDP for 2001-02 was revised upward to 5.7 per cent. For the year 2002-03, the fiscal
deficit was placed at 5.3 per cent of GDP and the market borrowing programme of the
Centre at Rs.1,42,867 crore (gross) and Rs.95,859 crore (net). While the market
borrowing programme in respect of some States has come under stress, RBI expects to
conduct debt management without serious pressure on overall liquidity and interest rates.

18
42.

The projection of overall growth rate for the year 2002-03 basically depends on

the speed of recovery in the industrial sector and the expected growth in agriculture. The
present indications show that agriculture is likely to grow at a higher rate than last year
and there are positive indications of a quicker recovery in the industrial sector with good
prospects for export sector. For the purpose of monetary policy formulation, for the year
as a whole, growth rate of real GDP in 2002-03 is placed at 6.0 – 6.5 per cent. The rate of
inflation is assumed to be slightly lower than 4.0 per cent. The projected expansion in
broad money (M3) for 2002-03 is 14.0 per cent. Consistent with this order of growth in
M3, an increase in aggregate deposits of scheduled commercial banks is set at Rs.
1,54,000 crore. Non-food bank credit adjusted for investments in commercial paper,
shares/debentures/bonds of PSUs and private corporate sector is projected to increase by
15.0 – 15.5 per cent. This magnitude of credit expansion is expected to adequately meet
the credit needs of all the productive sectors of the economy.

43.

Against this background, RBI proposes to continue to ensure that all legitimate

requirements for credit are met, consistent with price stability. Towards this end, RBI will
continue its policy of active demand management of liquidity through OMO, including
two-way sales/purchase of Treasury Bills and using the policy instruments at its disposal,
whenever required. Unless circumstances change unexpectedly, RBI will continue to
maintain current interest rate environment with a bias towards softer interest rate regime
in the medium-term. Further, the long-term objective would be towards realignment of
interest rates of all types of debt instruments, both the government and private sector,
within a narrow band.

44.

The monetary policy framework has also substantially changed during the past

few years in moving from direct to indirect instruments and improved the transmission
mechanism of monetary policy. This process is likely to accelerate with the
operationalisation of the Real Time Gross Settlement (RTGS) system. The precursors for
RTGS such as operationalisation of Negotiated Dealing System (NDS) and Clearing
Corporation of India Ltd. (CCIL) have been put in place. There have been substantial
improvements in the systems of regulation and supervision of banks and the proposal to

19
set up a Credit Information Bureau (CIB) to collect, process and share credit information
on the borrowers among banks and FIs within the existing legal framework attains
importance in this regard.

45.

The Bank Rate changes combined with CRR and repo rate changes have emerged

as signalling devices for interest rate changes and important tools of liquidity and
monetary management. The liquidity adjustment facility (LAF) has evolved as an
effective mechanism for absorbing and/or injecting liquidity on a day-to-day basis in a
more flexible manner and, in the process, providing a corridor for the call money market.
With most of the procedural and technological constraints removed, RBI’s endeavour to
make LAF much more efficient will continue. RBI will also continue its efforts to bring
about development and smooth functioning of the financial market and pursue further
financial sector reforms towards achieving a greater degree of financial stability.

46.

In sum, under normal conditions and barring emergence of any adverse and

unexpected developments in the various sectors of the economy, the overall stance of
monetary policy for 2002-03 will be:
?

Provision of adequate liquidity to meet credit growth and support investment
demand in the economy while continuing a vigil on movements in the price level.

?

In line with the above, to continue the present stance on interest rates including
preference for soft interest rates.

?

To impart greater flexibility to the interest rate structure in the medium-term.
III. Financial Sector Reforms and
Monetary Policy Measures

47.

The annual policy Statements as well as Mid-term Reviews have been focussing

on the structural and regulatory measures to strengthen the financial system and improve
the functioning of various segments of the financial market. These measures, introduced
after extensive consultations with experts and market participants, have been directed
towards increasing operational effectiveness of monetary policy, redefining the
regulatory role of the Reserve Bank, strengthening the prudential and supervisory norms,

20
improving the credit delivery system, and developing technological and institutional
infrastructure of the financial sector.

48.

Recent policy measures have endeavoured to take into account the technological

developments which have a major impact on the financial sector. Information technology
allows sophisticated product development, better market infrastructure, implementation
of reliable techniques for control of risks and also help the financial intermediaries to
reach distant and diversified markets. In view of this, technology has changed the
contours of three major functions performed by banks, i.e., access to liquidity,
transformation of assets and monitoring of risks. The interaction of technology with
deregulation is also contributing to the emergence of a more open, competitive and
globalised financial market which should improve efficiency in the economy, while at the
same time calling for greater vigilance and prudence in asset-liability management. In
this regard, banks have positively responded to the Reserve Bank’s directions to adopt the
necessary technology in their operations.

49.

Keeping in view the progress made in the implementation of measures taken so

far, and their impact on the soundness of the Indian banking system, it is proposed to
speed up the process further to enable the Indian financial sector to be better equipped to
meet the global competition.

Monetary Measures

(a)
Rationalisation and Reduction in
Cash Reserve Ratio
50.

The Reserve Bank has been pursuing its medium-term objective of reducing CRR

to the statutory minimum level of 3.0 per cent. In this direction, RBI gradually reduced
the CRR from 11.0 per cent in August 1998 to 7.5 per cent by May 2001. In the Mid-term
Review of October 2001, CRR of scheduled commercial banks [excluding Regional
Rural Banks (RRBs)] was reduced by 200 basis points to the present level of 5.5 per cent
of their net demand and time liabilities (NDTL). Rationalisation of CRR was also

21
initiated by withdrawing various exemptions given to banks on certain specific categories
of liabilities for the CRR requirement. Subsequently, all categories of banks, including
co-operative banks, were also made subject to the CRR prescription as applicable to the
scheduled commercial banks. These measures were designed to facilitate development of
short-term yield curve, develop money market, enhance availability of lendable resources
with banks and improve the efficacy of indirect instruments in the conduct of monetary
policy. Further, RBI announced its intention to move away from sector-specific
refinance. As a further step in the direction of moving towards the medium-term
objective of reducing the CRR while strengthening the LAF and introducing better
prudential standard, it is proposed to:
?

Reduce CRR further from 5.5 per cent to 5.0 per cent effective fortnight
beginning June 15, 2002.

The proposed reduction in CRR is being made effective from fortnight beginning June
15, 2002 in view of the prevailing excess liquidity with the banking system as can be
seen by larger turnover in the call money market and the higher average recourse to RBI
repos. However, in case there is an unexpected change in the liquidity conditions in the
market, RBI may advance the effective date of reduction before the above announced
date.

(b)

Bank Rate

51.

At present, there is substantial excess liquidity in the system which is reflected in

the repo amounts received by the Reserve Bank during the past six weeks. On April 4,
2002, the total amount tendered by way of repo was as high as Rs.30,055 crore. On an
average, amounts tendered by banks in one or three-day repos have ranged from Rs.1,565
crore to Rs.16,024 crore in the past six weeks. The repo rate is currently 6.0 per cent,
which is below the Bank Rate of 6.5 per cent, and call money rates on several days have
also been lower than the Bank Rate. In response to the easy liquidity situation, some
banks have also recently reduced their deposit rates as well as lending rates. Further,
yields on fixed income securities have also come down substantially. Under these

22
circumstances, on balance, it is considered desirable to leave the Bank Rate unchanged.
The matter, however, will be kept under constant review. In case the overall liquidity and
credit situation warrants, and inflation rate continues to remain low, a reduction in the
Bank Rate by up to half a percentage point (50 basis points) will be considered by RBI as
and when necessary.

(c) Statutory Liquidity Ratio of
Regional Rural Banks
52.

RRBs are required to maintain SLR at 25 per cent of their NDTL in cash or gold

or in unencumbered government and other approved securities. Unlike in the case of
scheduled commercial banks, balances maintained in call or fixed deposits by RRBs with
their sponsor banks are treated as “cash” and hence, reckoned towards their maintenance
of SLR. As a prudential measure, it is desirable on the part of all RRBs to maintain their
entire SLR portfolio in government and other approved securities, which many of them
are already doing. Accordingly:
?

All RRBs may maintain their entire SLR holdings in government and other
approved securities. In order to allow sufficient time to RRBs to convert existing
deposits with sponsor banks into government securities, this provision may be
complied with by March 31, 2003.

Interest Rate Policy

(a) Interest Rate Flexibility
53.

As pointed out in the earlier Section, the year 2001-02 witnessed one of the

steepest declines in interest rates on long-term government securities. The yield on 10year government securities declined by as much as 287 basis points. The secondary
market yield on 10-year paper is currently 7.27 per cent. The Bank Rate, the repo rate and
the overnight call money rates have also been very low in recent months ranging between
6.0 and 7.0 per cent. In relation to the average rate of inflation of 3.6 per cent during
2001-02, it is evident that the real interest rates on long-term paper, the Bank Rate and
short-term rates are now fairly reasonable.

23

54.

However, the sharp reduction in nominal and real interest rates is not yet fully

reflected in the interest rates generally charged by banks on advances. There is also some
evidence that the spread between the interest rates charged by banks to different
borrowers has also tended to widen. The relatively lesser reduction in the rates of interest
that most borrowers have to pay is despite the action taken by the Government in the last
three years to lower administered interest rates on Relief Bonds and small savings, etc. as
well as the sharp reduction by RBI in the CRR of banks (along with an increase in the
interest rate paid by RBI on eligible cash balances maintained by banks with RBI). The
reasons for the relative downward inflexibility in the commercial interest rate structure
seems to be primarily due to the following factors:
?

The average cost of deposits for major banks continues to be relatively high (6.25
to 7.25 per cent). Further, a substantial portion of deposits is in the form of longterm deposits at fixed interest rates. Thus, flexibility available to banks to reduce
interest rates in the short-run, without adversely affecting their return on assets, is
limited. The relatively high overhang of non-performing assets (NPAs) further
pushes up the average cost of funds for banks, particularly public sector banks.

?

The non-interest operating expenses of banks work out to 2.5 to 3.0 per cent of
total assets, putting pressure on the required spread over the cost of funds.

?

In view of legal constraints and procedural bottlenecks in recovery of dues by
banks, the risk-premium tends to be higher resulting in wider spread between
deposit rates and lending rates.

?

The large borrowing programme of the Government, over and above SLR
requirements, provides significant prospects for deployment of funds by banks in
sovereign paper.

55.

From the medium-term perspective, it is necessary to initiate measures to make

the interest rate structure in India more flexible and reflective of the underlying
inflationary situation. So far as reduction in spreads is concerned, it is no doubt necessary
to improve man-power productivity (for example, through increase in volumes), and also

24
reduce establishment costs. Some progress in this area has been made in the last two
years, but there is still a long way to go. However, it has to be recognised that, given
various constraints (including public ownership in the banking sector and legislative
provisions), especially poor debt-recovery systems, actual progress in reducing average
spreads is likely to be slow.

56.

Without prejudice to further progress in reduction in spreads, and other measures

to reduce delays in recovery, in order to impart flexibility to interest rate structure,
following measures need to be considered as early as possible:
?

Encourage introduction of flexible interest rate system for all new deposits with
reset at six-monthly intervals. At the same time, the fixed rate option should also
be made available to depositors. Illustratively, banks may offer longer term
deposits with six-monthly reset conditions and at the same time offer a fixed rate
for similar maturity, the interest rate on which may be higher or lower depending
on the period of deposit and banks’ perception regarding inflation as well as
interest rate outlook over the longer period. All banks are advised to put such a
flexible rate system (with a fixed rate option also for depositors) in practice as
early as possible.

?

Banks are also urged to devise schemes for encouraging depositors to convert
their existing long-term fixed rate past deposits into variable rate deposits.
Commercial banks may consider paying the depositors at the contracted rate for
the period of deposit already run and waive the penalty for premature withdrawal
if the same deposit is renewed at the variable rate.

(b)

Prime Lending Rate and Spreads

57.

In the Mid-term Review of October 1996, it was stated that “a number of banks

are charging lending rates far higher than PLR on a significant portion of bank credit to
borrowers with credit limits of over Rs.2 lakh. It has, therefore, been decided that banks,
along with the announcement of their PLR, should also announce the maximum spread

25
over the Prime Lending Rate for all advances other than consumer credit. Banks should
obtain the approval of their respective Boards for fixation of maximum spread over the
Prime Lending Rate”.

58.

As per the latest available information, spreads above PLR of some banks are

substantial. In the present interest rate environment, it is not reasonable to keep very high
spreads over PLR. Banks are, therefore, urged to review the present maximum spreads
over PLR and reduce them wherever they are unreasonably high so that credit may be
available to the borrowers at reasonable interest rates. Further, banks should also
announce the maximum spread over PLR to the public along with the announcement of
their PLR. The Reserve Bank will review the matter again in October 2002 after further
consultations with select banks with very high spread over PLR.

59.

In the interest of customer protection as also meaningful competition, it is

necessary to have a greater degree of transparency in regard to actual interest rates for
depositors as well as borrowers. In this direction, the following measures are proposed:
?

Banks should provide information on deposit rates for various maturities and
effective annualised return to the depositors. This information should be made
available to RBI also, so that RBI can put a consolidated picture for all banks on
its website.

?

Banks should provide information on maximum and minimum interest rates
charged to their borrowers. RBI will put this information also in public domain.

?

Banks are urged to switch over to “all cost” concept for borrowers by explicitly
declaring the processing charges, service charges, etc. charged to borrowers. Such
bank charges may also be publicly announced.

(c)

Interest Rate on Savings Account - No Change

60.

In the recent years, banks have been given freedom in fixing interest rates on

various deposit liabilities, and flexibility in offering interest rates depending upon tenor
and size of deposits with the approval of their Boards. The only interest rate on deposits

26
side which is regulated by RBI is on “savings account” with cheque facility. This rate is
at present 4.0 per cent per annum.

61.

However, although the nominal interest rate is 4.0 per cent per annum, the yield

on such deposits works out to 3.4 per cent per annum only as interest is payable on the
minimum balance between tenth and last day of each month. Nearly four-fifths of such
saving deposits are held by households.

62.

In view of the present deregulated interest rate environment and the reduction in

interest rates on Government’s small savings schemes in the recent period, there is an
apparent case for deregulation of interest rates on savings account also. However,
considering the fact that bulk of such savings deposits are held by households, including
households in rural and semi-urban areas, on balance, it is not considered as opportune
time to deregulate the interest rate on savings account for the present. In any case, the
present effective yield of 3.4 per cent is quite reasonable in relation to other prevailing
interest rates on even short-term instruments.
(d)

Interest Rate on Export Credit

63.

Exporters have the option to avail of pre-shipment and post-shipment credit in

foreign currency from banks in India. Such credit is currently available at LIBOR plus a
maximum spread of 1.0 percentage point making this rate internationally competitive for
Indian exporters. In order to make the interest rate even more competitive in the present
low interest rate environment, it is desirable to further lower the ceiling rate on foreign
currency loans for Indian exporters by banks. Accordingly:
?

The ceiling rate on export credit in foreign currency is being reduced to LIBOR
plus 0.75 percentage point from the present LIBOR plus 1.0 percentage point.

64.

Considering this competitive interest rate on foreign currency loans and to

mitigate any possible exchange risk, exporters are encouraged to make maximum use of
foreign currency loans in one or more currencies of their choice depending on the
currency of their export receipts (e.g., US dollar, euro, Pound Sterling, etc.). Indian

27
banks, located in areas with concentration of exporters, are being advised to give this
important facility due publicity and make it easily accessible to all exporters, including
small exporters.

65.

In the annual policy Statement of April 2001, interest rates on export credit in

rupee terms were rationalised and ceilings were prescribed for both pre-shipment and
post-shipment credit linked to PLR. This prescription of ceilings of 1.5 percentage points
below PLR has facilitated exporters to avail of credit at substantially lower rates than the
PLR of the banks. Considering the unusual international developments, effective
September 26, 2001, the ceilings on export credit interest rates were further reduced to
2.5 percentage points below PLR for a period of six months (i.e., up to March 31, 2002).
From April 1, 2002, the ceiling rates were to revert to 1.5 percentage points below PLR.
However, keeping in view the continued international uncertainties, the period during
which interest rate of 2.5 percentage points below PLR will be applicable has been
extended up to September 30, 2002. With this concession, the ceiling rate on preshipment rupee export credit up to 180 days works out to 7.5 to 8.5 per cent for most
public sector banks. As exporters are eligible to sell their export earnings in the forward
market, taking into account the forward premia, the effective interest cost to exporters
becomes only 2.0 to 3.0 per cent, which is internationally highly competitive.

66.

In view of the need to ensure transparency and also encourage banks to continue

to provide finance at competitive rates, there is a need for putting in place a reporting
system by which commercial banks provide information on interest rates charged on preshipment and post-shipment credit. This will facilitate exporters in choosing the most
competitive rate. Accordingly:
?

With effect from fortnight beginning June 15, 2002, banks will report to RBI,
the minimum and maximum lending rates to exporters. This information will
be placed in public domain.

67.

In view of the above proposals (i.e., a reduction in interest rates for foreign

currency loans to exporters and compulsory reporting of minimum and maximum lending

28
rates charged by banks to exporters), a further proposal which requires consideration is to
deregulate the interest rate on export credit in domestic currency. Linking of domestic
interest rates on export credit to PLR has become redundant in the present circumstances,
when the effective interest rates are in any case substantially lower than the PLR for
exporters. Deregulation of the present ceiling on interest rate for domestic currency, may
in fact encourage greater competition among banks and may have the effect of further
lowering interest rates for exporters with a good credit record. This proposal will be
considered by RBI after further consultations as necessary.

(e)

Deemed Exports

68.

As per the extant guidelines, banks are permitted to extend rupee pre-shipment

and post-supply rupee credit at concessional rate of interest to parties against orders for
supplies in respect of deemed exports. Such rupee export credits, both at pre-shipment
and post-supply stages, are eligible for refinance from RBI. However, it has been
represented that some exporters still do not get the advantage of the concessional rate of
interest in the case of deemed exports. Banks are, therefore, urged to widely publicise the
concessionality in the interest rates for deemed exports and make these available to all
eligible exporters.
(f) Abolition of Minimum Lending Rate
for Co-operative Banks
69.

State and Central Co-operative Banks were given freedom to determine their

lending rates subject to the prescription of minimum lending rate (MLR) of 12.0 per cent
per annum by the Reserve Bank since October 18, 1994. Similarly, the Urban Cooperative Banks (UCBs) were subject to the prescription of MLR at 13.0 per cent per
annum effective June 21, 1995, which was reduced to 12.0 per cent effective March 2,
2002. Since August 26, 1996, RRBs were given freedom to determine their lending rate.
At present, commercial banks other than RRBs have the freedom in deciding their PLRs
with the approval of their Boards. In the annual policy Statement of April 2001, PLR was
made a reference/benchmark rate, so that commercial banks are free to lend at sub-PLR

29
rates to creditworthy borrowers. In order to provide greater flexibility to co-operative
banks in a competitive environment, it is proposed:
?

To withdraw the stipulation of MLR for all co-operative banks with immediate
effect. Co-operative banks will now be free to determine their lending rates taking
into account their cost of funds, transaction cost, etc. with the approval of their
managing committee. This will help the co-operative banks in attracting
good/prime borrowers.

?

It should be ensured that the interest rates charged by co-operative banks are
transparent and known to all their customers. Banks are, therefore, requested to
publish the minimum and maximum interest rates charged by them, and display
this information in every branch.

(g) Liberalisation of Investment Norms of Funds
Mobilised under FCNR(B) Deposits
70.

At present, banks are allowed to accept FCNR(B) deposits for a period of 1-3

years. However, on the assets side, there are certain restrictions on deploying these
funds. Presently, banks can lend funds to Indian residents for their foreign exchange
requirements or for financing of Joint Ventures or Wholly Owned Subsidiaries set up by
resident corporates. Besides, banks can also invest such funds in certain money market
instruments which satisfy prescribed rating. In view of restrictions on the deployment of
funds, the assets side could be shorter in tenor than the liabilities side resulting in assetliability mismatches. Further, there exists interest rate risk in view of changes in LIBOR
rates, if matching investment opportunities are not available to banks. In this regard, RBI
had received a number of representations from banks for reviewing the investment
norms.

71.

In order to avoid asset-liability mismatches, and also consistent with the risk

management guidelines put in place by RBI, banks are now permitted:
?

To invest their FCNR(B) deposits in longer term fixed income instruments,
subject to the condition that these instruments should have an appropriate rating
prescribed for the money market instruments. Moreover, banks have to obtain

30
prior approval from their Boards with regard to type/tenor of instruments along
with relevant rating and likely cap on such investments within the asset-liability
management (ALM) guidelines in force.

(h) Interest Rate on FCNR(B) Deposits

72.

Currently, banks are free to accept FCNR(B) deposits for a maturity period of 1-3

years and to offer fixed and floating rates, subject to the ceiling of LIBOR/SWAP rates.
In view of the prevailing international environment of low interest rates, and to reduce
the cost of FCNR(B) deposits, it is decided:
?

To revise the above ceiling rate downward to LIBOR/SWAP rates for the
corresponding maturities minus 25 basis points.

(i) Relaxation on Borrowing from and Investment
in Overseas Market by Banks
73.

At present, banks in India are allowed to borrow from and invest in the overseas

market up to 15 per cent of their unimpaired Tier I capital or US $ 10 million, whichever
is higher. In order to enable banks to have greater operational flexibility and also to align
the domestic interest rate with overseas market, it is decided:
?

To allow banks to borrow up to 25 per cent of their unimpaired Tier I capital from
overseas market. The borrowings should be within the banks’ Open Position
Limit and maturity mismatch limits (Gap Limits) for which detailed guidelines
will be issued.

?

On the same lines, the existing limit of 15 per cent of unimpaired Tier I capital for
investment in overseas market is being raised to 25 per cent of unimpaired Tier I
capital. The investments in money market instruments will be within the existing
Open Position Limit and maturity mismatch limits (Gap Limits). This will ensure
uniformity in overseas borrowing and investment portfolio of banks.

The increased borrowing limit would enable banks to get cheaper funds and help them to
have adequate rupee resources and thus reduce the cost of funds for the banks. While it

31
will enhance the process of integration of Indian financial market with the global market,
different segments of the domestic market will also get further integrated.

(j) Crystallisation of External Commercial Borrowings

74.

It is customary for the overseas branches of the ADs in foreign exchange to

extend external commercial borrowings (ECBs) to Indian corporates against
guarantees/letters of comfort issued by their branches in India. A suggestion was made
by banks that they should have the freedom to crystallise the foreign exchange liability
in rupees in select cases where circumstances warrant, keeping in view the status of
account of the corporates and their impact on liabilities of overseas branches. In order to
provide greater freedom and flexibility to banks in their fund management, it is proposed
to:
?

Grant permission with appropriate safeguards for crystallisation of ECBs into
rupee loans where it is considered necessary by banks to do so.

Credit Delivery Mechanism
(a)

Priority Sector Lending

75.

In order to improve credit delivery mechanism for the priority sector, the Reserve

Bank has taken various measures to reduce procedural delays and provide greater
flexibility to banks. In order to further improve credit delivery to the priority sector, and
in particular to agriculture, the following measures are proposed:
?

The limits for financing of distribution of inputs for allied activities such as cattle
feed, poultry feed, etc. under priority sector is being increased to Rs.25 lakh from
the present limit of Rs.15 lakh.

?

In order to help the farmers in marketing their products, credit limits for
marketing of crops (pledge financing) is being increased from Rs.1 lakh to Rs.5
lakh. Further, the repayment schedules of such credit has been enhanced to 12

32
months from 6 months at present. With this liberalisation, farmers can have
maximum benefit in marketing their agricultural products.
?

To avoid any double counting, sponsor banks, while meeting the priority sector
targets, should exclude funds provided to RRBs for on-lending to priority sector.

(b)
Credit Facilities for
Small-Scale Industries
76.

Recognising the requirement of providing collateral securities as a bottleneck in

the flow of bank credit to very small units, RBI in annual policy Statement of April 2000,
announced dispensation of collateral requirement for loans up to Rs.5 lakh for tiny sector.
This dispensation was extended subsequently to all small-scale industrial (SSI) units. In
order to further improve the flow of credit to SSIs:
?

Banks may, on the basis of good track record of the units and the financial
position of units, increase the limit of dispensation of collateral requirement for
loans from the existing Rs.5 lakh to Rs.15 lakh.

77.

Banks are also advised to take a pro-active stance in providing timely assistance

for rehabilitation of small-scale units which are affected by the industrial downturn, and
delays in payments against supplies made by them to large-scale and other units. In
January 2002, following the report of a High Level Working Group, RBI issued detailed
guidelines to scheduled commercial banks for providing timely assistance to potentially
viable small-scale units. These guidelines, inter alia, provide for waiving of penal rate of
interest to such units, and for extension of working capital at 1.5 percentage points below
the prevailing fixed/prime lending rates. Provision has also been made in these guidelines
for extension of term loans at reduced rate of interest. Banks are requested to implement
these guidelines fully and to submit a report to their Boards by the end of the current
calendar year on the progress made in assisting small-scale units under the new
guidelines.
(c) Securitisation and Risk Weights
for Housing Finance

33
78.

Banks have been playing an important role in providing credit to the housing

sector in consonance with the goals of National Housing and Habitat Policy. Recognising
the growing importance of the construction sector including its forward and backward
linkages with other sectors of the economy, RBI has encouraged banks to increase the
flow of credit to this sector and has advised banks to allocate a minimum of 3.0 per cent
of incremental deposits for housing for the year 2001-02. In order to increase the flow of
credit, term loans extended by banks to intermediary agencies against the loans
sanctioned by them were allowed to be reckoned as part of housing finance. Also,
investment in bonds issued by HUDCO and NHB exclusively for financing of housing is
being reckoned for priority sector targets.

79.

At present, banks’ loans and advances secured by mortgage on residential

property and also commercial property are assigned a risk weight of 100 per cent for
capital adequacy purposes. So far no explicit risk weights have been prescribed for
banks’ investment in securitised papers. The Basel Capital Accord of 1988 and also the
New Capital Adequacy Framework, which is at the consultative stage, envisage risk
weight of 50 per cent and 100 per cent for claims secured by residential property and
commercial real estate, respectively.

80.

With a view to further improving the flow of credit to the housing sector, it is

proposed to liberalise the prudential requirements for housing finance by banks and
encourage investment by banks in securitised debt instruments of Housing Finance
Companies (HFCs). Accordingly:
?

Banks extending loans against residential housing properties would be required
to assign risk weight of 50 per cent, instead of present 100 per cent. Loans
against the security of commercial real estate would continue to attract 100 per
cent risk weight as hitherto.

?

Investments made by banks in Mortgage Backed Securities (MBS) of
residential assets by HFCs which are recognised and supervised by NHB would
also be assigned a risk weight of 50 per cent for the purpose of capital

34
adequacy. However, investment by banks in MBS of housing assets which
include commercial properties would attract 100 per cent risk weight.
?

Investments by banks in MBS issued by HFCs supervised by NHB will be
reckoned for inclusion in the prescribed housing finance allocation of 3.0 per
cent.

?

A Working Group would be set up to suggest modalities for widening the
investor base, improving the quality of assets, creating liquidity for trading in
such assets and other related issues.

(d) Kisan Credit Cards

81.

Kisan Credit Cards (KCC) Scheme formulated in 1998 has helped the farmers

considerably and has been very successful. The Reserve Bank had advised all banks
pursuant to the Budget 2002-03 announcement, to make concerted efforts to reach the
annual target of 33 lakh KCCs by March 2002. Further, banks were advised to ensure that
all existing and prospective KCC holders are covered under the Personal Accident
Insurance Policy. In addition, banks are urged to make suitable plans for covering all
eligible borrowers in agricultural sector under the KCCs by March 2004. It is proposed
that a survey may be conducted for assessing the impact of the scheme on the
beneficiaries. This survey may be entrusted to an outside agency.
(e) Rural Infrastructure Development Fund
82.

Pursuant to the announcement made in the Budget 2002-03, funds for RIDF VIII

will be enhanced to Rs.5,500 crore and the rate of interest on loans to the State
Governments will be reduced from 10.5 per cent to 8.5 per cent, i.e., Bank Rate plus 2.0
percentage points. Henceforth, interest rate on loans to States from RIDF are linked to the
Bank Rate.

(f) Micro-credit

35
83.

Micro-credit institutions and Self Help Groups (SHGs) are important vehicles for

generation of income and delivery of credit to self-employed persons. Special emphasis
was also placed on promotion of micro enterprises in rural areas set up by vulnerable
sectors including women, SC/ST and other backward classes. Banks were also advised to
provide maximum support to SHGs in this regard. As the scheme of micro-credit through
SHGs is progressing well, the target for the same has been raised to 1.25 lakh for 200203. Accordingly, scheduled commercial banks and NABARD may take immediate steps
in forming such linkages across the country so as to achieve the aforesaid target.
Money Market
(a) Moving further towards Pure
Inter-bank Call Money Market
84.

It may be recalled that in the annual policy Statement of April 2001, the intention

to move towards a pure inter-bank call/notice money market, by gradually phasing out
non-bank participation, was highlighted. Accordingly, a time-frame was outlined in four
stages for implementation. In stage I, non-bank participants are allowed to lend, on
average, up to 85 per cent of their average lending during 2000-01 in a reporting
fortnight. These limits are strictly monitored by RBI. However, in case a particular
financial institution has excess liquidity at some point of time but could not explore
proper avenues for investment, RBI permits the institution to lend more than the
prescribed limit for a specific period with suitable limits. A review of progress revealed
that phasing out non-banks has not caused any strain on the market: the volatility in the
call money rate has reduced and average daily turnover in the call money market has
gone up. Simultaneously, net lending through repo transactions by non-banking financial
institutions and mutual funds have also increased. In view of these encouraging
developments, and with the operationalisation of NDS and CCIL, it is felt necessary to
accelerate the progress of moving towards a pure inter-bank call/notice money market
and facilitate further deepening of the repo market. Accordingly, it has been decided:
?

To move towards stage II, wherein non-bank participants would be allowed to
lend, on average, in a reporting fortnight up to 75 per cent of their average

36
lending in call market during 2000-01 with effect from a date to be announced
later. RBI will announce the date of effectiveness of stage II depending on the
date when NDS/CCIL becomes fully operational, and widely accessed.

(b)

Reliance on Call/Notice Money Market

85.

Narasimham Committee II had recommended that there must be clearly defined

prudent limits beyond which banks should not be allowed to rely on call/notice money
market, and that access to this market should essentially be for meeting unforeseen
mismatches and not as a regular means of financing banks’ lending operations. This was
also recognised in the guidelines on Asset-Liability Management System issued by RBI
in February 1999 which required, inter alia, that mismatches during the first two time
buckets, viz., 1-14 days and 15-28 days should not, in any case, exceed 20 per cent of the
cash outflows in each time bucket. Further, in order to reduce excessive reliance on shortterm funding, banks were also advised to set a cap on inter-bank borrowings, especially
call borrowings.
86.

Some banks, however, continue to depend overwhelmingly on call money market

for carrying out their banking operations. It needs to be appreciated that call money
borrowings, being uncollateralised in nature, have the potential to create serious
instability in the financial market because of unethical or imprudent behaviour of some
participants. In view of such an observed phenomenon in early part of last year, a ceiling
on access to call money market was imposed in respect of a select segment. At present,
except for UCBs, which are subject to a ceiling on borrowing of 2.0 per cent of their
aggregate deposits of previous financial year, other entities are not under any explicit
limit.
87.

An internal Working Group has examined the need to place prudential limits on

exposure to call/notice money market in a symmetric way so as to preserve the integrity
of the financial system. The Group felt that building up of substantial exposure relative to
balance-sheet size by some participants on a continuous basis has the potential not only
for default and the consequent systemic instability, but also impedes the development of

37
other segments of money market, particularly, the term money market. The Technical
Advisory Committee on Money and Government Securities Markets (TAC) also
suggested linking of borrowing and lending in call/notice money market to the size of the
balance sheet. Accordingly:
?

Lendings of scheduled commercial banks in the call/notice money market, on a
daily basis, should not exceed 25 per cent of their owned funds (paid-up capital
plus reserves) as at the end of March of the previous financial year.

?

Borrowings by scheduled commercial banks in the call/notice money market, on a
daily basis should not exceed 100 per cent of their owned funds or 2.0 per cent of
aggregate deposits as at the end of March of the previous financial year,
whichever is higher.

?

In order to ensure that scheduled commercial banks do not face any disruption in
their ALM in adjusting to this stipulation, the existing borrowers and lenders
should unwind their positions in excess of the prudential limits by the end of
August 2002.

?

The borrowings of State Co-operative Banks (SCBs) and District Central Cooperative Banks (DCCBs) in the call/notice money market on a daily basis should
not exceed 2.0 per cent of their aggregate deposits as at the end of March of the
previous financial year.

?

In case any bank has, for a temporary period, some mismatches in their liquidity
positions, RBI, on request, may consider allowing them further access to
call/notice market. Similarly, if any bank has put in place a fully functional ALM
system to the satisfaction of RBI, an increased access over the stipulated norm
may be permitted by RBI for a longer period.

?

A Working Group is being constituted with representatives from eligible entities
to recommend by June 30, 2002, the criteria for fixing the limits for Primary
Dealers (PDs) in call/notice money market and suggest a road map for phasing
them out from the call money market. In the meanwhile, all PDs are urged to keep
their call money lending/borrowing within a prudent limit in relation to their net
owned funds.

38
88.

The limits so prescribed for call/notice money market are prudential in nature, and

are sufficiently high for most of the participants in the market, and it is expected that all
legitimate liquidity needs of banks would be met.
(c) Collateralised Lending Facility
89.

At present, RBI is providing standing liquidity facilities comprising (i) Export

Credit Refinance (ECR) and Collateralised Lending Facility (CLF) to banks, and (ii)
liquidity support to PDs. These are in addition to facilities operated through LAF as also
outright sales/purchases of government securities as part of open market operations
(OMO). With the inherent superiority of the LAF in moderating liquidity in the financial
system, both banks and PDs have tended to rely to a predominant extent on LAF.
90.

Scheduled commercial banks are provided CLF against the collateral of excess

holdings of Government of India dated securities/Treasury Bills over their SLR
requirement. The extent of liquidity support available to each bank has been stipulated at
equivalent to 0.125 per cent of its fortnightly average outstanding aggregate deposits in
1997-98. Accordingly, the overall limit for the system stands at Rs.656.61 crore as of
now; however, the average utilisation of this facility in 2001-02 up to the fortnight ended
March 22, 2002 was Rs.124 crore. With the development of inter-bank repo market and
operationalisation of CCIL, the standing facilities could be phased out. Accordingly:
?

CLF may be phased out with effect from the fortnight beginning October 5,
2002. RBI, however, will have the option to reintroduce CLF for a temporary
period in future, should it be considered necessary to do so in the light of
changes in monetary conditions.

?

The apportionment of liquidity facilities to PDs between normal and back-stop
will be reviewed by the Working Group set up vide paragraph 87.

(d) Certificates of Deposit
91.

Several developments in financial market have so far been undertaken by RBI,

which include issuing of guidelines for Commercial Paper (CP) in consultation with the
market players. Subsequently, Fixed Income Money Market and Derivatives Association

39
(FIMMDA) was requested to prepare the necessary standard procedures and
documentation to be followed by the participants in the CP market. Such guidelines were
issued by FIMMDA in June 2001. Further, as announced in the annual policy Statement
of April 2001, instructions were issued to banks and FIs that they should make
investments and hold CPs only in the dematerialised form and convert existing
outstandings also into demat form by October 31, 2001. It was felt that on similar lines
standard procedures and guidelines for issuing Certificates of Deposit (CDs) may also be
prepared for the benefit of issuers of CDs. Accordingly, FIMMDA has prepared the
guidelines and documentation procedures in consultation with market participants,
depositories and RBI. Pending release of final guidelines and as a further step towards
transparency, it has been decided that:
?

With effect from June 30, 2002, banks and FIs should issue CDs only in the
dematerialised form. The existing outstandings of CDs shall be converted into the
demat form by October 2002.

Government Securities - Review of
Recent Developments
92.

The Reserve Bank has been continuously making attempts in deepening and

widening the government securities market both in primary and secondary segments.
Some significant steps which RBI has taken include: elongation of the maturity profile of
outstanding issuance including issuances of bonds of 25 years maturity, development of
new benchmark government securities by consolidating new issuances in key maturities,
enhancing fungibility and liquidity through consolidation by reissuances of existing
loans, promoting retailing of government securities and introduction of floating rate
bonds.
93.

Important developments in infrastructure facilitating trading and settlement in

money and government securities markets are the operationalisation of the NDS and
CCIL. The market has also become more diversified with the entry of new participants
such as high networth individuals, co-operative banks, large corporates, mutual funds and
insurance companies. The uniform valuation basis, as announced by FIMMDA, provides
transparency to the market and facilitates active management of portfolios. The

40
regulatory and supervisory framework for the PDs has been strengthened in accordance
with the risks perceived in the market, in line with international practices.

(a) Uniform Price Auction

94.

With the experience of uniform price auction in the issuance of 91-day Treasury

Bills (since November 6, 1998), the annual policy Statement of April 2001 proposed to
extend uniform price auction format to the auctions of Government of India dated
securities on selective and experimental basis. In line with this policy, the uniform price
auction format was extended to the auctions of Floating Rate Bonds (FRBs) on
November 21 and December 5, 2001. The government securities auction held on April 4,
2002 was also based on uniform price auction, on an experimental basis. RBI will
continue to take recourse to uniform price auctions on an experimental and selective basis
during this calendar year also as considered necessary.
(b) Negotiated Dealing System
95.

The Negotiated Dealing System (Phase I) has been operationalised effective

February 15, 2002. The NDS provides on-line electronic bidding facility in the primary
auctions of Central/State Government securities, OMO/LAF auctions, screen-based
electronic dealing and reporting of transactions in money market instruments including
repo, secondary market transactions in government securities and dissemination of
information on trades with the least time lag. In addition, the NDS facilitates “paperless”
settlement of transactions in government securities with connectivity to CCIL and the
DVP settlement system at the Public Debt Office. So far, 80 market participants
including 31 non-bank participants are members of NDS. All entities having SGL
Accounts with RBI have been advised to become members of NDS by May 31, 2002.

(c) Government Securities Act

96.

The Reserve Bank made a proposal to replace the existing Public Debt Act, 1944

by Government Securities Act to simplify the procedures for transactions in government

41
securities, allow lien-marking/pledging of securities as also electronic transfer in
dematerialised form. This proposal was approved by the Government of India. The State
Governments have completed the process of passing the requisite resolutions under
Article 252 of the Constitution of India empowering the Parliament to enact the
Government Securities Bill. With the concurrence of all State Legislatures also having
been obtained, the Finance Minister in his Budget speech for 2002-03 proposed to
introduce the Bill in the present Parliament Session.

(d)
Retailing of Government Securities
through Non-competitive Bidding
97.

In the Mid-term Review of October 2001, RBI had announced finalisation of a

scheme to encourage retail participation, in particular by mid-segment investors like
UCBs, non-banking financial companies (NBFCs), Trusts, etc., in the primary market of
government dated securities. Accordingly, the scheme of non-competitive bidding facility
with a provision for allocation up to 5.0 per cent of the notified amount to retail investors
at the weighted rate that evolves in the case of competitive bidding was announced on
December 7, 2001.

98.

The scheme was operationalised on January 14, 2002, when auction of 15-year

Government stock was held. In this auction, 36 non-competitive bids from 273 applicants
were received through PDs and banks amounting to Rs.148.3 crore against the allocation
of Rs.250 crore. In the twin auctions held on April 4, 2002 for 7-year and 10-year
Government stocks, 46 non-competitive bids from 304 applicants amounting to Rs.238.5
crore were received as against the reserved amount of Rs.350 crore. While 2.97 per cent
of the notified amount was allotted in January 14, 2002 auction, on April 4, 2002, it was
3.41 per cent. The scheme was continued in the auction of a new 15-year Government
stock for Rs.6,000 crore held on April 15, 2002, wherein 19 bids from 137 applicants for
an amount of Rs.95.49 crore (1.59 per cent of notified amount) have been received and
fully allotted.

42
99.

It is advisable for banks to promote schemes for sale/purchase of government

securities over their counters to retail investors through demat accounts with depositories
or with CSGL account holders. A few banks and PDs have taken useful initiatives to
promote retail investment in government securities by offering these securities for sale at
retail outlets coupled with facility of holding investments and servicing thereof through
existing demat account with depositories or in CSGL accounts. The proposed
Government Securities Act specifically recognises the rights of ownership of such
investors. In formulating such schemes, PDs and banks may also provide both sale and
purchase facility to ensure that the retail investors are assured of liquidity of such
investments. Banks could also promote retail sale of government securities along with
schemes for availing of automatic finance against such investment at attractive rates,
thereby providing ready liquidity.

(e) Treasury Bills

100.

The auctions of 14-day and 182-day Treasury Bills were discontinued since May

14, 2001. The notified amount of 91-day Treasury Bills was increased to Rs.250 crore
from May 16, 2001. The notified amount of 364-day Treasury Bills was enhanced from
Rs.750 crore to Rs.1,000 crore with effect from April 3, 2002.

(f) Consolidation of the Government Stocks

101.

The consolidation of the Government stocks by improving fungibility imparts

liquidity to the existing stocks, limits the number of floating stocks and helps in building
benchmark securities. However, flexibility in active consolidation is limited because of
large market borrowing programme of the Government year after year. Since April 1999,
RBI has been attempting “passive consolidation” by reissuing the existing stocks through
price-based auctions which resulted in limiting the number of outstanding stocks. As at
the end of March 2002, there were 111 government securities with outstanding amount of
Rs.5,36,325 crore, of which 23 securities, each with minimum outstanding amount of
Rs.10,000 crore, accounted for more than 50 per cent.

43

(g) Floating Rate Bonds

102.

In order to cater to the diverse needs of investors in government securities, several

innovative instruments, like Zero Coupon Bonds, Floating Rate Bonds (FRBs), Index
Linked Bonds, etc. were issued in the past. Currently, except for one Capital Indexed
Bond, which will mature this year, all outstanding government market loans are in the
form of plain vanilla fixed rate bonds. In view of ALM and risk weight needs of the
major investors such as banks, two FRBs of 5-year and 8-year maturity were issued for a
total amount of Rs.5,000 crore in November/December 2001 which were fully
subscribed. FRBs serve as a diversifying instrument in debt management as it takes
advantage of the term premium while minimising refinancing risk. However, FRBs are
vulnerable to interest rate risks. Considering both the advantages and the risks, issue of
further FRBs in the current year would be examined.

(h) Calendar for Dated Securities

103.

In order to enable both institutional and retail investors to plan their investments

better, the Government announced issuance of calendar for dated securities for 2002-03.
Such an advance calendar imparts transparency to the Government’s borrowing
programme and is expected to bring stability in the government securities market. Out of
the total expected borrowing for first six months, a calendar for an amount of Rs.68,000
crore was announced. The remaining market borrowing programme for the first half of
the year, as in the past, will be announced from time to time depending upon the
emerging requirement of the Government and market conditions.
(i) Separate Trading for Registered Interest and
Principal of Securities
104.

A road map for developing STRIPS was prepared and put on RBI website for

comments and suggestions from the market participants. The Government was requested

44
to issue necessary clarification on tax treatment of Zero Coupon Bonds. In order to
operationalise the scheme of STRIPS, it has been decided:
?

To constitute a Working Group comprising banks and market participants to
suggest operational and prudential guidelines in respect of STRIPS.

(j) Satellite Dealer System

105.

In the Mid-term Review of October 2001, RBI announced its decision to

undertake a review of the Satellite Dealer (SD) system in consultation with market
participants. After obtaining the views of the Primary Dealers Association of India
(PDAI) and after further discussions in TAC and considering their role in the present
conditions, it has been decided to discontinue the system. Accordingly:
?

No new SDs will be licensed.

?

Existing SDs will be required to make action plans, satisfactory to RBI for
termination of their operations as SDs by May 31, 2002.

(k) Issue of Long-term Bonds for Insurance
Companies and Others
106.

RBI has been consciously elongating the maturity profile of government debt

having regard to its implications for the Government’s annual borrowing requirements
and debt redemption pattern, need for establishing benchmark for long-term financing for
infrastructure and catering to the needs of long-term investors such as insurance
companies, provident funds and pension funds. During 2001-02, a 25-year bond was
issued for Rs. 8,000 crore after a span of 17 years. RBI proposes to continue its policy of
issuing long-term bonds to meet the requirements of such investors.

(l) Automatic Debit Mechanism

107.

In some cases, State Governments have given instructions to RBI to debit their

accounts on specified dates either as a matter of course to meet certain obligations or in
case of specified events. Such automatic debits carry an overriding priority over other

45
payments. After examining the past experience with automatic debits, a Technical
Committee of State Finance Secretaries on State Government Guarantees had observed
that pre-emption through automatic debit mechanism runs the risk of resulting in
insufficient funds for financing critical minimum obligatory payments such as, salaries,
pensions, amortisation and interest payments. In view of the recommendation of the
Committee, and keeping in view the need to maintain integrity of the public debt segment
of debt markets, it is proposed that:
?

In future, as a general policy, with prospective effect, to dispense with such
automatic debits where there are no legal or other compulsions.

?

Where there is a legal compulsion for creation of such mechanism, to suggest
amendments to such provisions.

?

To review all the existing automatic debits in consultation with State
Governments and others concerned, with a view to dispensing with such
mechanisms wherever feasible.

Urban Co-operative Banks
(a) New Apex Supervisory Body
108.

The annual policy Statement of April 2001 had announced a proposal to set up a

new Apex Supervisory Body to take over the entire inspection/ supervisory functions
relating to scheduled and non-scheduled UCBs in consultation with the Central
Government. In the Mid-term Review of October 2001, it was mentioned that RBI has
submitted a draft Bill on setting up of a separate Supervisory Authority. The matter is
under consideration of the Government.
109.

The events of the last two years have made it abundantly clear that the present

system of dual/triple regulatory and supervisory control (involving Centre, States and
RBI) is not conducive to efficient functioning of the co-operative banks in the interest of
their depositors. Several committees in the past have also recommended elimination of
multiple layers of supervision and regulation of this sector. In view of the local interest
involved, it is also clear that there is no consensus at present in favour of removing

46
supervisory and regulatory responsibilities at Central/State Government levels, and for
entrusting it exclusively to RBI. As a result, the managements and boards of several cooperative institutions continue to reflect political interests rather than genuine cooperative spirit, and are not always amenable to normal banking discipline in their
operations. In view of this, it would be best, in the interest of the public depositors, if the
situation is faced squarely and a separate supervisory authority is set up, with
representatives of Centre, State and other interested elements. Such a body can then be
exclusively made responsible for efficient functioning of the co-operative institutions,
and also take responsibility for ensuring the safety of public deposits.
(b) Working Group on Asset-Liability Management
110.

It was indicated in the Mid-term Review of October 2001 that RBI has circulated

the report of the Working Group on ALM guidelines for UCBs to select UCBs for their
comments. Only six banks responded; however, their responses were positive. It was felt
that the guidelines need simplification and towards smooth implementation, a few
workshops may be held to explain these guidelines for obtaining feedback from the
officials/CEOs of UCBs in their implementation. The first workshop held on January 1415, 2002 at College of Agricultural Banking, Pune was attended by 37 executives from
17 UCBs. The second workshop was conducted at Bankers Training College, Mumbai.
After taking into account the suggestions received from the participating banks in the two
workshops, the guidelines have since been issued.
(c) Supervisory Rating System for UCBs
111.

The Reserve Bank, based on its on-site inspection, had put in place a supervisory

rating “CAMELS” model for Indian commercial banks and “CACS” model for foreign
banks so as to assess their performance. In 1999, on-site inspection based on “CAMELS”
model was extended to UCBs as an additional tool for supervision. Since UCBs are
members of the payment system and also beneficiaries of deposit insurance scheme, in
the light of recent experience, it is felt that there is a need to further strengthen the
supervisory regime for UCBs. Towards this end, RBI constituted a Working Group in
October 2001 to evolve a suitable rating model for UCBs taking into account their

47
operational characteristics. The Working Group in consultation with CEOs of large
UCBs, submitted its report on March 23, 2002. The recommendations of the Group are
being examined and necessary guidelines would be issued in due course.
Supervision and Monitoring
112.

Progress made in respect of certain announcements made in the annual policy

Statement of April 2001 is reviewed below:
(a) Off-site Monitoring and Surveillance
113.

The Reserve Bank had rationalised off-site returns to monitor liquidity and

interest rate risks on quarterly basis in 1999. With the intention to finally move over to a
fortnightly reporting system, in consultation with the banks, a revised system was put in
place in June 2000. The reporting schedule for the reports on (i) interest rate sensitivity,
(ii) structural liquidity, both for rupee and forex transactions, (iii) assets, liabilities and
exposures, (iv) exposure to sensitive sectors, and (v) Indian subsidiaries, was made
monthly with effect from October 2001.
(b) Risk Based Supervision
114.

The Project Implementation Group formed for the smooth switch over to Risk

Based Supervision (RBS) process by 2003, has initiated certain management processes
which include preparation of discussion paper, risk profiling, manual writing, training
and legal requirements. The responses from banks on the discussion paper were analysed
and in order to assess their progress and needs in this regard, a consultation process has
started. The Group has prepared a draft risk assessment template for risk profiling of
banks under the RBS approach. The template is being tested with a few banks for further
customisation and refinement. An internal group was constituted for drafting of Manuals.
(c) Prompt Corrective Action
115.

As indicated in the Mid-term Review of October 2001, the scheme of prompt

corrective action (PCA) with various trigger points for prompt responses by the

48
supervisors was developed and sent to the Government for their views before
implementation. The Government has since cleared the scheme which will be put in place
shortly.
(d) Macro-Prudential Indicators
116.

It was indicated in the annual policy Statement of April 2001 that pilot reviews

using macro-prudential indicators (MPIs) for the half-year ended March 2000 and
September 2000 were prepared for internal circulation. Subsequently, the reviews for the
half-year ended March 2001 and September 2001 were also prepared. While the earlier
reviews were largely compilation of MPIs, scope and coverage of the subsequent reviews
are enhanced by including data on capital market, forex market and other segments of the
financial system.
(e) Consolidated Accounting and Supervision
117.

As mentioned in the annual policy Statement of April 2001, the Board for

Financial Supervision (BFS) has evolved an approach for consolidated supervision as
appropriate in the Indian context. A multi-disciplinary Working Group was set up to look
into the introduction of consolidated accounting and quantitative techniques for
consolidated supervision, in line with international best practices. The Group’s report was
placed before BFS on January 29, 2002. The report was also put in public domain for
comments/suggestions. Based on the comments, necessary guidelines would be issued by
RBI.
Present Status of Prudential Measures
118.

Increasing globalisation and blurring of distinction among different segments of

financial intermediaries have posed a special challenge for banking sector. Being the
mainstay of financial intermediation, developing a sound and healthy banking system
through promotion of prudent financial practices has become essential to sustain financial
stability. It has been recognised that Indian banking system should be in tune with well
laid down international standards of capital adequacy and prudential norms.

49

119.

RBI initiated the banking sector reforms as per the recommendations of

Committee on the Financial System to improve the financial health and enhance the
efficiency, productivity and profitability of the Indian banking system over time.
Keeping in view the changes in pace and pattern of developments in the financial
sector and with the objective of achieving convergence between Indian standards and
international best practices, a number of measures were announced in earlier policy
Statements. The progress made in the implementation of these measures along with
further measures considered necessary are indicated below.
(a) Adoption of 90 days Norm for
Recognition of Loan Impairment
120.

As indicated in the annual policy Statement of April 2001, banks were advised to

adopt 90 days norm to classify their assets from the year ending March 31, 2004. They
were asked to chalk out an appropriate transition path for smoothly moving over to the 90
days norm and submit their action plans with the approval of their Boards to RBI. As a
facilitating measure, they were advised to move over to charging of interest at monthly
rests by April 1, 2002. In this connection, some banks sought clarifications on application
of interest on agricultural advances, options available for applying interest for longer
rests, etc. In consultation with IBA, detailed guidelines were issued clarifying that with
effect from April 1, 2002, banks may move over to charging of interest on loans/advances
at monthly rests except for agricultural advances.

(b) New Basel Capital Accord
121.

In the Mid-term Review of October 2001, it was mentioned that RBI had

forwarded its comments on the second consultative paper on the New Capital Accord
issued by the Basel Committee on Banking Supervision (BCBS). The Committee
received over 200 responses from national supervisors, banks, international institutions
and others which can be accessed at www.bis.org. Such wide variety of comments
indicate the fact that achieving global consensus on the methodology of capital regulation
is not an easy task. Many respondents have expressed their concerns at the difficulties

50
that would be experienced in implementing the proposals on account of their complexity
and costs. Several respondents have also pointed out that capital requirements could
increase across the board in most jurisdictions on account of the new proposals.

122.

In view of these, the consultation process has been extended and some

modifications to the proposals are currently being discussed by BCBS which could
mitigate the more than anticipated upward impact on capital requirements. Another
Quantitative Impact Study (QIS) will be conducted in the coming months with wider
participation and the Reserve Bank will also be participating in this impact assessment.
At the same time, an internal group in RBI is also engaged in developing a suitably
modified approach within the philosophical framework of the Basel proposals which
could be adapted to the Indian situation and simpler to implement and supervise. For this
purpose, the internal group will invite representatives from select banks to provide inputs
into the development of the modified approach as well as the upcoming QIS. Further,
assigning risk weights for bank assets should largely be a matter for the banks or their
supervisors. Banks are expected to constitute an expert internal team to study the
methodology of the new proposals and its likely impact.
(c) Counterparty and Country Risks
123.

The Reserve Bank is committed to the implementation of the “Core Principles for

Effective Banking Supervision” drawn up by BCBS. It is a matter of satisfaction that the
banking system in India is largely compliant with most of the Core Principles.

124.

In October 1999, RBI had issued risk management guidelines which, inter alia,

advised banks to use the country ratings of international rating agencies and classify the
countries into low risk, moderate risk and high risk categories and endeavour to develop
an internal matrix that reckons the counterparty and country risks. With a view to moving
further in complying with the Core Principles, RBI would be shortly issuing draft
guidelines on country risk management and provisioning therefor in consultation with
banks, IBA and other market participants.

51
(d) Capital for Market Risk

125.

It was announced in the Mid-term Review of October 1998, that government and

other approved securities would have to be provided for a risk weight of 2.5 per cent
towards market risk by March 31, 2000. Guidelines on categorisation and valuation of
banks’ investments, in consonance with international practices, were also announced in
the Mid-term Review of October 2000 and were effective from the half-year ended
September 30, 2000. Accordingly, banks were required to provide for 2.5 per cent risk
weight on SLR and non-SLR securities, with effect from March 31, 2000 and 2001,
respectively, as an interim arrangement, till such time as banks move over to the
framework suggested by the Basel Committee.

126.

The Basel norms provide for assigning capital for market risk on a standardised or

on internally developed Value at Risk (VaR) methods. As the valuation norms on banks’
investment portfolio have already been put in place and aligned with the international
best practices, it is appropriate to adopt the Basel norms on capital for market risk. In
view of this, banks are advised to study the Basel framework on capital for market risk as
envisaged in Amendment to the Capital Accord to incorporate market risks published in
January 1996 by BCBS and prepare themselves to follow the international practices in
this regard at a suitable date to be announced by RBI.

(e) Prevention of Money Laundering

127.

India has been sharing the increasing international concern on the use of the

financial system for money laundering and financing of terrorism. The challenges faced
by the international community in combating financial crimes require sustained and coordinated action among the various agencies concerned with regulation and enforcement
responsibilities, both in India and abroad. RBI and the Government have initiated various
steps from time to time to check any misuse of the financial system for laundering
proceeds of criminal activities.

52
128.

As part of these initiatives, RBI is in the process of issuing a Master Circular

setting out the policy, procedures and controls required to be introduced by banks. These
include strict adherence to “Know Your Customer” (KYC) procedures for prevention of
misuse of banking system for money laundering and financing of terrorist activity. The
recommendations of the Working Group on Anti-Money Laundering set up by IBA
would also be taken into account while framing the guidelines.

(f) Reduction in Transition Period of a Sub-standard
Asset to Doubtful Category
129.

Narsimham Committee II had recommended that an asset should be classified as

doubtful, if it is in the sub-standard category for 18 months in the first instance and for 12
months subsequently. Accordingly, RBI had announced in the Mid-term Review of
October 1998 that with effect from March 31, 2001, an asset should be classified as
doubtful, if it has remained in the sub-standard category for 18 months.

130.

Consistent with the recommendations of Narsimham Committee II and with a

view to moving closer to international best practices, it is proposed that:
?

With effect from March 31, 2005, an asset would be classified as doubtful if it
remained in the sub-standard category for 12 months. Banks are permitted to
phase the consequent additional provisioning over a four-year period, with a
minimum of 20 per cent each year.

(g) Recovery of Non-Performing Assets
131.

It was indicated in the Mid-term Review of October 2001, that the broad

framework provided for compromise settlements of NPAs issued by RBI in 1995 will
continue to be in place and banks are free to design and implement their own policies for
recovery and write off incorporating compromise and negotiated settlements with the
approval of their Boards. The Finance Minister in his meeting with the CMDs of banks
held on November 12, 2001 at New Delhi had indicated that a suitable scheme be
evolved for small borrowers by banks for recovery of dues up to Rs.25,000. Accordingly,
banks have been advised to formulate a policy for recovery of dues, principal amount

53
(excluding the interest element) in all sectors irrespective of the nature of business or
purpose, which have become NPAs as on March 31, 1998. As announced in the Budget
2002-03, a special one time settlement (OTS) scheme for small and marginal farmers to
cover loans up to Rs.50,000 has been issued. At the request of Government of India, RBI
also conducted a review of the functioning of the Debt Recovery Tribunals (DRTs)
subsequent to various amendments carried out in the Recovery of Debts Due to Banks
and FIs (Amendment) Act, 2000, with reference to their position as on March 31, 2001.

(h) Corporate Debt Restructuring
132.

It may be recalled that in August 2001, RBI had issued guidelines on Corporate

Debt Restructuring (CDR) for implementation by banks and FIs to put in place a
framework outside the purview of BIFR, DRT and other legal procedures to ensure
timely and transparent mechanism for restructuring debts of viable corporate entities
facing financial problems. As proposed in the Budget 2002-03, RBI constituted a High
Level Group (Chairman: Shri Vepa Kamesam, Deputy Governor) to review the
operations of the CDR scheme to identify the operational difficulties, if any, in smooth
implementation of the scheme and to suggest measures to make the scheme even more
effective. As an interim measure, it has been decided that permission for debt
restructuring will be made available by RBI on the basis of specific recommendations of
CDR “Core-Group”, if a minimum of 75 per cent (by value) of the lenders constituting
banks and FIs consent for CDR, irrespective of differences in classification of the assets
by banks/financial institutions.
(i) Non-SLR Investments by Banks
and Financial Institutions
133.

A mention was made in the Mid-term Review of October 2001 that further

prudence should be observed by banks and FIs in order to contain the risk arising out of
non-SLR investment portfolio of banks and FIs, in particular through the private
placement route. The draft prudential guidelines on management of non-SLR investment
portfolio were issued to banks for their comments/views. On the basis of feedback,
guidelines are being finalised and would be issued in due course.

54

(j) Investment Fluctuation Reserve

134. The Reserve Bank, with a view to building up of adequate reserves to guard against
any possible reversal of interest rate environment in future due to unexpected
developments, advised banks in January 2002, to build up an IFR of a minimum 5.0 per
cent of the investment portfolio within a period of 5 years. However, banks have been
given the freedom to build up IFR to a maximum of 10.0 per cent of the portfolio
depending on the size and composition of their portfolio, with the approval of their
Board. On the basis of feedback received from banks on the above proposals, it has been
decided that IFR should be computed with reference to investments in two categories,
viz., “Held for Trading” and “Available for Sale”. Thus, it will not be necessary to
include the investment under “Held to Maturity” category, which is not meant to be
traded, for purposes of computation of IFR.
Technology Upgradation
135.

The Reserve Bank has been playing a pivotal role in upgrading the payment and

settlement system in the country. The progress achieved so far in consolidating the
existing payment systems, developing new technologically advanced modes of payment
and moving towards the ultimate objective of linking various payment and settlement
systems into an efficient and integrated system that will function in real-time
environment has been substantial.
136.

The Mid-term Review of October 2000 mentioned the preparation of a “Payments

System Vision Document”. After examining the comments/feedback, the final version of
the Vision Document was published in December 2001. It provides a road map of
important developments in the payment system projects. This would facilitate banks in
getting fully prepared to participate effectively in the new products aimed at better
payment and settlement services.

(a) Networking of Branches of Banks
for Information Dissemination

55

137.

The process of reforms in payment and settlement systems has gained momentum

with the implementation of projects such as NDS, Centralised Funds Management
System (CFMS) for better funds management by banks and Structured Financial
Messaging Solution (SFMS) for secure message transfer. This would result in funds
transfers and funds-related message transfer to be routed electronically across banks
using the medium of the Indian Financial Network (INFINET). To reap the full benefits
of such electronic message transfers, it is necessary that banks bestow sufficient attention
on the computerisation and networking of the branches situated at commercially
important centres on a time-bound basis. Intra-city and intra-bank networking would
facilitate in addressing the “last mile” problem which would in turn result in quick and
efficient funds transfers across the country.
(b) Extension of Electronic Funds Transfer Facilities
138.

Recognising that the key to quick, safe and efficient funds transfers lies in the use

of electronic modes of funds transfers, the Reserve Bank has improved the existing
facilities under Electronic Funds Transfer (EFT). EFT is now available for transfer of
funds across banks and 13 different centres with one settlement a day and an enhanced
per transaction limit of Rs. 2.0 crore which would make EFT attractive even for corporate
funds movement. In the case of four metropolitan cities, the settlement is being effected
at three time slots every day which will shortly be extended to all the other centers so as
to enable transfers on a T+0 basis. Adequate security features are also being incorporated
in the EFT scheme, apart from providing for integration of the RBI’s EFT scheme with
various schemes already in vogue within some banks. Once all banks start using the EFT
on a large scale, the dependence on conventional funds transfer modes would diminish
thus bringing about greater efficiency in the movement of funds, better funds
management capabilities for constituents of banks and reduction in risks associated with
funds transfers which take time.
(c) Real Time Gross Settlement System – Status

56
139.

In earlier policy Statements, RBI had announced its intention of putting in place a

RTGS system, which will enable real time movement of funds. The preparatory work for
RTGS system has been completed and a suitable vendor for designing and development
of the system has been selected. The work on design specifications is in progress. These
specifications would take into account the international best practices as suitable to
requirements of Indian banking. The system is scheduled to be ready for testing in about
a year.

Ownership Functions of Reserve Bank of India

140.

It was indicated in the annual policy Statement of April 2001 that RBI should not

own the institutions it regulates. Towards this end, in the case of Discount and Finance
House of India (DFHI) and Securities Trading Corporation of India (STCI), the process
of disinvestment has already been completed.

141.

The Finance Minister in his Budget speech for 2002-03 announced that the

Deposit Insurance and Credit Guarantee Corporation (DICGC) will be converted into the
Bank Deposits Insurance Corporation (BDIC) to make it an effective instrument for
dealing with depositors’ risks and distressed banks. Appropriate legislative changes will
be proposed for this purpose. In the case of transfer of ownership of RBI in State Bank of
India, National Bank for Agriculture and Rural Development and National Housing
Bank, an internal Working Group was constituted to recommend the modalities, viz.,
valuation, payment adjustments, etc. and the legislative measures required consequent to
transfer of shareholding. The Working Group has submitted its report in November 2001
which was forwarded to the Government for their comments.
Non-Banking Financial Companies

142.

The Reserve Bank has received applications for Certification of Registration

(CoR) from 36,414 Non-Banking Financial Companies (NBFCs), of which, 14,079
applications were approved and 19,058 were rejected as at the end of March 2002. Out of

57
14,079 companies, only 780 NBFCs have been allowed to accept/hold deposits from the
public. Applications of 3,277 companies are still pending for various legal/procedural
reasons. Out of these, 2,916 applications are held in abeyance pending enactment of the
Financial Companies Regulation Bill, 2002.
143.

Certain NBFCs were granting demand/call loans with an open period or without

any stipulation regarding the rate of interest and servicing. Difficulty was experienced in
ensuring compliance with prudential norms on income recognition, asset classification
and provisioning in respect of such loans. In order to obviate these difficulties and to
ensure that all such loans are appropriately classified and the position of NPAs is truly
reflected in the financial statements of NBFCs, it was decided that all NBFCs
granting/intending to grant demand/call loans should lay down a policy duly approved by
their Board. The policy should cover aspects such as stipulation of cut-off date within
which the repayment of the loan will be demanded/called up, stipulation of the rate of
interest and the periodic rests for payment of interest, stipulation of cut-off date not
exceeding 6 months for review of the performance of loan, criteria for renewal.
Directions covering NPA classification and provisioning requirements have also been
issued.
144.

With a view to further strengthening the regulatory/supervisory framework for

NBFCs, the following measures are proposed.

(a) Formation of SRO for NBFC Sector

145.

The Reserve Bank has taken a number of steps to speed up the reform process in

the functioning of NBFC sector along prudent lines. For further development of this
sector, emphasis has been placed on formation of a Self Regulatory Organisation (SRO),
particularly for the benefit of smaller NBFCs. Towards this end, as mentioned in the Midterm Review of October 2001, RBI has been on an on-going basis discussing with the
Informal Advisory Group of NBFCs and also with various NBFC Associations. In the
meeting of the Informal Advisory Group held on March 11, 2002, the matter was

58
discussed and the representatives of NBFC Associations have informed that SRO would
be constituted at the earliest.
(b) Submission of Returns by NBFCs
146.

NBFCs are required to submit periodic control returns to RBI. However, as laxity

has been observed in this regard, in order to inculcate a sense of discipline in this sector,
it has been decided to take action against NBFCs for non-submission of returns.
Accordingly, in the first instance:
?

RBI would impose penalties as provided for in the Reserve Bank of India Act,
1934 as also launch court proceedings, besides considering rejection/cancellation
of the CoR of NBFCs having public deposits of Rs.50 crore and above, in case of
default in the submission of returns.

147.

The above stipulation in respect of the size of NBFCs (i.e., Rs.50 crore and

above) will be progressively reduced over time to ensure that as far as possible, all
NBFCs submit periodic returns on a timely basis.

Rationalisation of Current Account Facility
with the Reserve Bank
148.

As indicated in the Mid-term Review of October 2001, an internal Group was set

up to rationalise the present policy of access to current account facility provided by RBI
in view of phasing out of non-banks from call/notice money market, upgradation of
payment system infrastructure such as operationalisation of CCIL and NDS and
operations of OMO/LAF only through banks and PDs. These would obviate the need of
non-bank entities to have access to current account with RBI. In this context, a Group of
Senior Executives of RBI was constituted to examine the recommendations of the report,
suggest modifications and take such other follow-up actions as necessary. In order to
ensure that current account facility with the Reserve Bank serves its core objectives, it
has been decided that current account facility may be extended only to scheduled
commercial banks, scheduled co-operative banks, and PDs. Current account facility for

59
entities other than those indicated above would be phased out in due course. A
programme for phasing out current account facility in respect of all India financial
institutions will be chalked out concurrently. At a later stage, depositories like NSDL,
CDSL and other custodians like SHCIL will also be phased out and they can then operate
through banks.

International Financial Standards and Codes

149.

The Mid-term Review of October 2001 mentioned the progress made by the

Advisory Groups on International Financial Standards and Codes. All the ten Advisory
Groups constituted by the Standing Committee have submitted their reports to the
Chairman of the Standing Committee and these reports were placed on RBI website for
wider dissemination. It was also mentioned that the Standing Committee will prepare its
own report indicating the course of follow-up/reforms required and the regulatory
agencies involved in such follow-up actions. The Standing Committee is synthesising the
views and comments of all the Advisory Groups and the final report will be placed
shortly in the public domain for wider dissemination and appropriate follow-up action.

Short-Term Liquidity Assessment Model

150.

Considering the importance of guiding monetary policy operations on a sound

basis, the annual policy Statement of April 1999 mentioned the need for developing a
short-term operational model which takes into account the behavioural relationships
among different segments of the financial system. Under the guidance of a Group of
eminent academic experts, an operational model was developed and is being tested. The
draft model will also be put on RBI’s website for wider public debate. Once the model is
made operational, it may be feasible to constitute a technical committee in order to assist
in monetary policy strategy. It is felt that in future, a technical monetary policy
committee would act as a back office projecting various alternate policy strategies as is
the practice in some other central banks.

60
Mid-term Review

151.

A review of credit and monetary developments in the first half of the current year

will be undertaken in October 2002. The Mid-term Review will be confined to a review
of monetary developments and to such changes as may be necessary in monetary policy
and projections for the second half of the year.

Mumbai
April 29, 2002

Annexure
RBI Working Groups – Progress Report
Expert Committee on Bank Frauds
The Expert Committee on Bank Frauds (Chairman: Dr. N. L. Mitra) submitted its
Report to RBI in September 2001. The report was examined as per the directions of the
BFS and the report along with comments of RBI was forwarded to the High Level Group
on frauds in banking sector constituted by Central Vigilance Commission (CVC) for its
examination and comments.
Consultative Group for Strengthening the Internal
Supervisory Role of Boards of Banks
A consultative Group of Directors of Banks and FIs was constituted under the
Chairmanship of Dr. A.S. Ganguly, Director, Central Board, RBI to suggest, for
consideration of the Government/RBI, measures that could be taken in respect of
strengthening the internal supervisory role of Boards of banks/FIs in view of the on-going
financial sector reforms which has entrusted greater autonomy and powers to the banks’
Boards. The Group submitted its report recently which is under examination.

Transparency and Accounting Standards

61
A Working Group was constituted under the Chairmanship of Shri N.D. Gupta,
President, ICAI along with representatives from RBI and commercial banks to put in
place appropriate arrangements to identify the compliance and also gaps in compliance
with the accounting standards issued by ICAI and to recommend steps to
eliminate/reduce such gaps. The Working Group will, inter alia, analyse the difficulties
faced by the banks in adoption of the accounting standards and evolve suitable guidelines
in this regard. Report is awaited.
Defaulters’ List – Widening the Coverage
A Working Group was constituted under the Chairmanship of Shri S. R. Iyer,
Chairman, Credit Information Bureau (India) Ltd. (CIBIL), with representatives from
RBI, commercial banks and FIs, to examine the possibility of the CIBIL performing the
role of collecting and disseminating information on the list of suit filed accounts and the
list of defaulters, including wilful defaulters, which is presently handled by RBI. The
Group submitted its report which is under examination.

Credit Information Bureau
A Working Group under the Chairmanship of Shri S.R. Iyer, Chairman, CIBIL
with representatives from banks, FIs and RBI was constituted to evolve a framework for
collecting and sharing of information on private placement of debt. The Report submitted
by the Group is being examined.

