Statement by Dr.Bimal Jalan,Governor,
Reserve Bank of India
on
Mid-Term Review of Monetary and Credit
Policy for 1998-99

Introduction

It will be recalled that in the last Monetary and Credit Policy Statement
on April 29, 1998, it was indicated that a review of credit and monetary
developments in the first half of the year will be undertaken in October of
each year. It was also indicated that the October review would generally be in
the nature of a mid-term review of monetary developments during the year,
and will not necessarily involve changes in credit policy measures.
2.

This statement consists of three parts: (i) Mid-term review of Macro-

Economic and Monetary Developments in 1998-99, (ii) Stance of Monetary
Policy for the second half of 1998-99, and (iii) Monetary and Financial Sector
Reforms. No changes in short-term measures such as the Bank Rate, CRR,
Repo rate are being announced at this point of time. As pointed out in the
April Statement, these credit and regulatory measures will continue to be
subject to change at short notice in the light of actual domestic developments
and emerging external market conditions.
3.

The Committee on Banking Sector Reforms (Narasimham Committee),

which submitted its report earlier this year, has made certain far-reaching
recommendations. The detailed recommendations of the Committee have
now been considered in consultation with the Government of India, and
decisions in regard to several of them are being announced in this statement.
4.

In order to deliberate on issues relating to harmonising the operations

of banks and financial institutions, the Reserve Bank of India (RBI) had, in
December 1997, set up a Working Group comprising Chairmen of some
commercial banks and development financial institutions under the

Chairmanship of Shri S.H.Khan, the then Chairman of the Industrial
Development Bank of India. The Group submitted its full report in May, 1998.
As announced in the April Monetary and Credit Policy Statement, a
“Discussion Paper” is under preparation, which would contain Reserve
Bank’s views on the Working Group’s recommendations/suggestions. This
paper will be circulated for discussion shortly. The final decision on the
issues

raised

in

this

paper

will

be

taken

in

the

light

of

the

suggestions/comments received on it.
Mid-term Review of Macro-economic and
Monetary Developments in 1998-99.
i) Domestic Developments
5.

Monsoon has been good this year, and it is expected that agriculture

will bounce back from a negative growth in 1997-98 to a positive one in 199899. However, at present, there is some uncertainty about the extent of likely
increase in agricultural production during the year as some parts of the
country have been affected by floods and late rains. Taking this factor into
account, a rate of growth of 3 per cent in agricultural production over the
depressed level of 1997-98 seems a reasonable estimate at this point of time,
pending further confirmation about the effect of late rains. As regards
industrial growth, although there are some incipient signs of recovery, it is not
yet clear whether the rate of growth in industrial output will be substantially
higher than last year’s growth of 6.5 per cent. Allowing for the turnaround in
agriculture and some recovery in industrial production, at present the best
estimate for GDP growth for 1998-99 is in the region of 6 per cent (as
compared with 5.1 per cent in 1997-98). In view of the global slow-down in
economic activity, this order of growth will place India as one of the very few
countries, developed or developing, which will show a relatively high positive
rate of growth during the current year.
6.

The rate of inflation, as measured by the wholesale price index on a

point-to-point basis, is currently ruling at over 8 per cent, which is significantly

2

higher than the rate which, as pointed out in the April Statement, should not
exceed 5 to 6 per cent per annum. So far, the increase in the rate of inflation
is concentrated in a few primary commodities, particularly fruits and
vegetables and edible oils. Hopefully, with the arrival of the new crop, and the
beginning of the period of seasonal decline in prices, the annual rate of
inflation would decelerate in the next three - four months. However, recent
trends in inflation are a matter of concern, and there can be no room for
complacency on this account.
7.

The rate of growth of Money Supply (M3) during the current financial

year upto October 9, 1998 has been 10.1 per cent compared with 7.3 per
cent in the corresponding period of the previous year, partly due to inflows of
receipts on account of Resurgent India Bonds (RIBs). If RIB inflows are
excluded, M3 expansion during the current financial year so far would be
around 7.9 per cent. On a year-on-year basis, M3 growth (October 9, 1998
over October 10, 1997) was 20.6 per cent (and excluding RIB receipts, 18.3
per cent) as against 16.8 per cent in the comparable period of the preceding
year. Thus, even if the impact of RIB inflows is excluded, there has been a
strong growth in money supply during the current financial year so far. The
current year’s M3 expansion is mainly reflective of the sharp increase in
aggregate deposits of scheduled commercial banks which showed an
increase of Rs.66,563 crore (11.0 per cent) as compared with Rs.37,687
crore (7.5 per cent). Time deposits have increased by Rs.68,480 crore (13.6
per cent) as compared with Rs.42,824 crore (10.3 per cent) last year. Thus,
the increase in aggregate deposits is attributable to growth in time deposits
which was even higher than the increase in aggregate deposits.
8.

Reserve money which essentially represents liquid cash balances in

the economy rose by Rs.8,343 crore (3.7 per cent) in the current financial
year upto October 9, 1998, as compared with Rs.5,640 crore (2.8 per cent) in
the corresponding period of the previous financial year. With net foreign
exchange assets of the Reserve Bank growing by a lower amount in the
current financial year upto October 9, 1998 (Rs.8,967 crore as against

3

Rs.13,337 crore last year), net RBI credit to Government had assumed
significance in the reserve money creation, having gone up by Rs.11,010
crore in contrast to a decline of Rs.8,947 crore in the same period of last
year.
9.

The Budget for 1998-99, presented to Parliament on June 1, 1998

projected a fiscal deficit of 5.6 per cent of GDP. Accordingly, the gross
borrowing requirement of Central Government for the year is placed at
Rs.79,376 crore. Net borrowing requirements were placed at Rs.48,326
crore. The corresponding actuals for 1997-98 were Rs.59,637 crore and
Rs.40,494 crore, respectively. The borrowing requirements estimated for
1998-99 are undoubtedly high and account for a substantial portion of the
incremental deposits in the banking system. In order to minimise the impact
of such high borrowing requirements on the interest rate outlook, the Reserve
Bank had indicated on June 11, 1998, its intention to accept private
placement of securities from time to time (in the event of market bids being at
relatively high levels due to uncertainties in the market) and then release
them to the market as conditions improve.
10.

This approach has worked reasonably well. As on October 29, 1998,

nearly 84.9 per cent of the gross and 93.0 per cent of the net borrowing
programme has been completed. Despite a steep hike in the repo rate of 300
basis points on August 20, 1998 and an increase in cash reserve ratio (CRR)
by 1 percentage point effective the fortnight beginning August 29, 1998, the
yields on primary auctions of longer term Central Government papers issued
in September 1998 have increased by only three basis points each for 6-year
security and 10-year security over the yields on issues of same tenor made
earlier in July 1998. The Reserve Bank has also taken measures to minimise
the impact of RIB inflows on money markets by offering special repo and
other facilities for temporary parking of excess liquid funds with banks.
11.

Despite some additional pressures on the fiscal position, the

Government has announced its firm intention to contain the fiscal deficit, and
its borrowing requirements, to the levels announced in the Budget for 19984

99. This is a welcome development, as the importance of containing fiscal
deficit to budgeted levels in the current year cannot be over-emphasised. The
current inflation rate is a matter of concern and the outlook for industrial
growth continues to be uncertain. The external environment is also highly
unfavourable. In this situation, any increase in the fiscal deficit during the
year would put further pressure on the outlook for medium and long-term
interest rates, besides adding to the already high rate of monetary growth.
Looking beyond the current year, it is becoming increasingly evident that a
significant reduction in fiscal deficit over the next 2 to 3 years is now a high
national priority. Beyond a point, it is simply not feasible for banks and
financial institutions to increase the share of Government securities in their
overall asset portfolio without affecting their own viability - and indeed the
viability of the productive sectors of the economy.
12.

There was a substantial increase in food credit extended by scheduled

commercial banks. Food credit has expanded by Rs.3,464 crore (upto
October 9, 1998) as against Rs.1,455 crore in the corresponding period of
last year, reflecting in part the increase in food procurement operations and
the build-up of buffer stocks of foodgrains. Non-food credit has also shown a
substantial increase during the current year. Most of the increase has taken
place in the last two fortnights (upto October 9, 1998). The increase in nonfood credit to the commercial sector by scheduled commercial banks was of
the order of Rs.6,972 crore (2.2 per cent) in the current financial year upto
October 9, 1998 as against Rs.4,686 crore (1.7 per cent) in the
corresponding period of last year. The total resources flow to commercial
sector including banks’ investments in shares and debentures, capital issues,
borrowings from financial institutions, etc., have shown a sharper increase.
Scheduled commercial banks’ investments in commercial paper, shares,
debentures, etc., increased by Rs.8,787 crore in the current financial year so
far as compared with Rs.8,506 crore in the comparable period of last year.
Together with such investments, the total flow of resources from the
scheduled commercial banks to the commercial sector went up by Rs.15,759
crore (4.6 per cent) compared with Rs.13,192 crore (4.5 per cent) in the

5

corresponding period of 1997-98. The total resources flow to commercial
sector including capital issues, GDRs and borrowings from financial
institutions was much higher at Rs.41,792 crore upto October 9, 1998 as
against Rs.34,645 crore in the corresponding period of last year.
13.

It will be recalled that, following the April 1998 monetary and credit

policy, there was some disappointment that, in the absence of a CRR cut,
there could be a shortage of liquidity resulting in substantially higher interest
rates. At that time, the Reserve Bank had drawn attention to the prevailing
easy liquidity conditions and had given an assurance that CRR would be
reduced in case there was any evidence of tight liquidity conditions. As it
happened, liquidity conditions eased further during the period May to August
1998. Outstanding amounts of repos on a daily basis during this period
averaged Rs.5,064 crore. In retrospect, it is clear that the decision not to cut
the CRR at that time proved to be the correct one. In view of subsequent
developments, it is arguable that CRR should have in fact been raised in April
itself. However, given the state of market expectations at that time, such a
move could have been highly destabilising, possibly resulting in a sharp jump
in interest rates. The events of the last few months illustrate the delicate
balance that has to be struck between conflicting considerations in deciding
on changes in monetary policy measures in the short-term. Monetary policy
has to facilitate growth while at the same time maintaining external and
internal stability. In the long run, these objectives are mutually reinforcing;
however, in the very short run, they may point in different directions.
(ii) External Developments
14.

The period since the April monetary and credit policy was announced

has presented major challenges for management of the external sector. The
East Asian economic crisis, which appeared to be coming under control
during the earlier part of the year, continues to remain serious. The contagion
spread to Russia in August and could affect some Latin American countries
as well. The economic outlook in Japan appears uncertain. Equity, bond and

6

forex markets in the United States and Europe have also been affected.
Although there has been some upward movement in global stock markets in
the past fortnight, the world economy, as a whole, continues to be faced with
considerable uncertainty. In addition to the unfavourable external situation,
India was also confronted with certain other developments after the Pokhran
test. Among these developments were the economic sanctions imposed by
certain industrial countries, the suspension of fresh multilateral lending
(except for some sectors), the downgrade by rating agencies, and the
reduction in net investment of foreign institutional investors.
15.

Viewed against the above background, developments in respect of

India’s foreign exchange market have been orderly and generally satisfactory.
A major positive development has been the success of the Resurgent India
Bonds (RIBs) floated by the State Bank of India. Foreign currency resources
amounting to US $ 4.2 billion were raised under the RIB scheme. India’s
present foreign currency assets are higher than at the beginning of January
1998 in both gross and net terms (i.e., after excluding forward liabilities).
Considering the unfavourable international environment, this is a matter of
some satisfaction. The level of reserves also substantially exceeds the total
stock of short-term debt and portfolio flows. As a matter of cautious policy,
India has kept its short-term as well as forward liabilities at a low level in
relation to the size of its reserves.
16.

In the earlier part of the year, there was considerable discussion on

movements in the Real Effective Exchange Rate of the rupee (REER). As
pointed out in the Reserve Bank of India’s statement on June 11, 1998, the
RBI does not consider REER to be an effective tool for management of shortterm movements in the exchange rate. REER movements are subject to
various influences, including capital flows, and the estimation of REER raises
several methodological issues, e.g., the choice of a basket of currencies, the
choice of the base period, the choice of trade-based weights, and the choice
of a price index. Nevertheless, in view of the interest in this measure, the
Reserve Bank has been publishing movements in the REER of the rupee

7

using trade based weights for 36 countries. In order to make this data more
up-to-date, in the last few months, the Reserve Bank has also been releasing
supplemental information on REER based on 5-country trade based weights
with more recent base years. The latest statistics, since June 1998, in regard
to the market rate of the rupee (i.e., RBI Reference Rate) and the imputed
REER, with the base year 1993-94, are given below for information. It is,
however, reiterated that while these data have some information content, the
Reserve Bank does not use short-term movements in REER as indicator of
appropriateness or otherwise of exchange rate movements.
Month & Year

RBI Reference Rate

Imputed value of Rupee
Based on REER
(Base 1993-94=100)
(Rupees per US dollar)

June, 1998

42.25

42.05

July, 1998

42.51

42.55

August, 1998

42.75

43.04

September, 1998

42.52

42.11

October 29, 1998

42.29

41.12

17.

The primary objective of the Reserve Bank and the Government in

management of the exchange rate is to maintain orderly conditions in the
foreign exchange market, and to prevent the emergence of destabilising
speculative activities. To this end, as in the past, the Reserve Bank will
continue to closely monitor developments in the financial markets at home
and abroad, and take such monetary and administrative actions as may be
considered necessary from time to time. The Reserve Bank will not hesitate
to use its reserves, when warranted, to meet sharp day-to-day supplydemand imbalances in the market. As before, it will ensure that lumpy and
uneven demand, particularly for oil imports and debt servicing obligations of
Government, does not cause any disturbance in the orderly functioning of
foreign exchange market.

8

18.

A reduction in interest rates for pre-shipment and post-shipment credit

to exporters by 2 percentage points (from the prevailing levels) was
announced by Government in August 1998, to be effective upto the end of
March 1999. Thus, for most categories of export credit, the interest rate is 9
per cent per annum. In order to facilitate the implementation of this decision,
the Reserve Bank announced a corresponding reduction of 2 percentage
points in the refinance rate available to banks for export credit (to 7 per cent
from 9 per cent per annum). The average utilisation of export credit refinance
during the fortnight ended October 9, 1998 was Rs.4,838 crore as compared
with Rs.24 crore during the corresponding fortnight last year, which has
added to the growth of liquidity in the system. While the importance of
accelerating the rate of growth of exports can hardly be over-emphasised, it
must be stressed that provision of rupee export credit at present rates is not
sustainable in the long run. As already announced, these rates will revert to
earlier levels after March 1999. In order to ensure internationally competitive
interest cost for exporters, on June 11, 1998, the Reserve Bank had advised
banks to charge a spread of not more than 1.5 percentage points over LIBOR
on foreign currency loans (as against 2.0/2.5 percentage points over LIBOR
prior to this date). Such foreign currency loans can be serviced out of foreign
currency export receipts. Exporters are advised to make maximum use of this
facility. Banks are also requested to make this facility easily accessible
without any procedural hassles.
19.

In order to create an exporter-friendly environment and to simplify

procedures for delivery of credit to exporters, the Reserve Bank will be
setting up a Working Group of bankers. This group of officials will interact
with exporters as well as local bank officials by visiting bank branches in
some of the major exporting centres especially where small and medium size
exporters are located. On the basis of such interactions, the Working Group
will

suggest

changes

designed

to

reduce

repetitive

documentation

requirements and improve the quality and reduce cost of non-fund based
services to exporters. The objective would be to make available export credit
“on line”, including foreign currency loans mentioned above, on the basis of

9

performance with minimum paper work, and provide related services
efficiently.

20.

Exporters currently enjoy a facility to retain a portion of their earnings

repatriated to India to be utilised for certain purposes under the scheme of
Exchange Earners Foreign Currency (EEFC) accounts. Over a period,
improvements have been made in the EEFC scheme by enhancing the
retention percentage as also purposes for which the balances in the account
can be utilised. Presently, the entitlement is 50 per cent for all foreign
exchange earners and 70 per cent for exporters coming under the categories
of export oriented units (EOUs) or of those who operate in export processing
zones, etc. The balances can be presently utilised for all trade related
expenses outside India as also for payment to residents in foreign exchange
in consideration of supply of goods and services, and approved capital
account transactions. The Working Group of bankers being constituted to
simplify procedures for credit delivery to exporters will also review the
operation of the EEFC scheme with a view to suggesting improvements in the
scheme and making it more exporter friendly.
Stance of Monetary Policy for
October 1998 - March 1999
21.

As the preceding review has brought out, there are several areas of

concern in respect of current monetary trends in the economy. Money supply
growth, attributable largely to growth in the banking sector’s credit to
Government, is too high in relation to the expected growth of the real sector
of the economy. The rate of inflation is also higher than the initial projections.
Although the price rise during the current financial year so far is largely
concentrated on a few food items (e.g., fruits and vegetables and edible oils),
there is no denying the fact that such a high rate of monetary growth is
inconsistent with the objective of maintenance of general price stability. In
this situation, a case could be made out for monetary tightening through
measures, such as, increasing the interest rates or a further increase in the
CRR.
10

22.

However, it has to be recognised that industrial slowdown is still

persisting, and as far as possible nothing should be done to dampen
emerging signs of incipient recovery in the real sector. This view is reinforced
by the fact that growth of bank credit to the commercial sector has not been a
primary cause of expansion in money supply in the current year. These
conflicting considerations, viz., the need to reduce monetary expansion while
at the same time nurturing real growth, starkly illustrate the monetary policy
dilemma that the RBI faces at the present juncture.
23.

On balance of considerations, for the time being, it is not proposed to

change the CRR or interest rates. RBI will continue to manage liquidity
through Open Market Operations and repo operations. The Reserve Bank will
not hesitate to resort to further monetary tightening if inflationary pressures
increase or if external developments so warrant.
24.

In the past year, as indicated in the April Statement, there has been a

pro-active management of liquidity in the system through open market
operations and more frequent variations in the repo rate. Fixed rate repos
were first introduced as a regular monetary policy instrument on November
29, 1997 at the rate of 4.5 per cent. In view of excess liquidity in the system
and forex market developments, the repo rate was raised in three stages to 9
per cent on January 16, 1998. After the return of stability in the forex market,
the repo rate was reduced in stages to 5 per cent by June 1998. On August
20, 1998, however, in response to external market developments and
anticipated large inflows of additional liquidity on account of RIB funds, the
repo rate was increased to 8 per cent. As a consequence, the outstanding
repo of RBI averaged Rs.6,329 crore per day in September, 1998. The repo
rate, has thus, served as a reference point for market expectations about the
movement in short-term interest rates. This is reflected in the fact that the
inter-bank call rates have generally tracked above the fixed rate repo in
recent months. Since April 1997, the Bank Rate has also been used flexibly,
although less frequently. It is proposed to continue with the policy of flexible

11

use of interest rate instruments to signal RBI’s stance regarding monetary
conditions and management of the flow of liquidity in the system.
Monetary and Financial Sector Reforms
25.

The financial crisis in South-East Asia and Japan has brought to the

fore the problems that weak and fragile domestic financial sector can pose for
the real economy. It is now established beyond reasonable doubt that while a
persistent and unexpected downturn in the real economy creates difficult
problems for the financial sector, a fragile financial sector can deepen the
real economy crisis and impose heavy social costs. It is, therefore, of utmost
importance to strengthen capital adequacy, income recognition and
provisioning norms for banks as well as other financial institutions and to
move towards full disclosure and transparency in banking operations in line
with international best practices.
26.

As a part of economic reforms, since the early nineties, the capital

adequacy and other prudential norms of banks have been strengthened and
currently are close to the international standards. The quality and standards
of supervision have also been upgraded substantially under the direction of a
separate Board for Financial Supervision under the aegis of the Reserve
Bank of India. Barring the performance of a select few weak banks, whose
problems are being addressed separately, the improvement in the banking
sector as a whole is impressive. In terms of inherent robustness, it is well
recognised that the Indian banking system’s exposure to real estate or shares
is negligible, while open foreign currency exposure limits are severely
restricted. Their off-balance sheet liabilities are also very small due to
regulatory restrictions and a relatively large part of banking system’s assets
are in secure investments particularly in Government and approved
securities. These features of the Indian banking system are important
strengths and contribute to their long-term financial viability.
27.

While substantial progress has already been made as a result of

implementation of several recommendations made by the first Narasimham

12

Committee Report (i.e., the Report of the Committee on Financial System), it
is now necessary to go further. The second Narasimham Committee Report,
submitted to Government earlier this year, provides the basis for doing so.
(i) Narasimham Committee II
28.

In consultation with the Government of India, the Reserve Bank has

finalised its views on a large number of specific recommendations, which are
within its purview. The aspects on which decisions taken by RBI along with a
brief summary of the Committee’s recommendations are given separately as
a part of this statement (Annexure). Some of the important decisions, which
will be implemented in phases over a period of time, are as follows:
• In line with the international best practices, the minimum capital to risk
asset ratio is being raised from the existing 8 per cent to 9 percent which
would take effect from the year ending March 31, 2000.
• With a view to further improving the quality of asset portfolio and
enhancing the financial soundness of banks, income recognition and
provisioning norms on Government guaranteed advances are being
brought on par with those on other advances with effect from the financial
year 2000-2001. Provisions on existing and old government guaranteed
advances which would consequently become NPA are to be fully provided
for over a period of four years beginning March 31, 1999.
• For enhancing the inherent strength of banks’ balance sheets, provisioning
requirements are being introduced for standard assets with effect from
financial year ending March 31, 2000. The time frame for categorising an
advance as doubtful debt is being shortened. The banks would be
permitted to achieve the said provisioning norms in two phases, during the
years 2000-2001 and 2001-2002.
• By the year ending March 31, 2000, Government/approved securities will
have to be provided for a risk weight of 2.5 per cent. The balance of 2.5

13

per cent risk weight on Government/approved securities will be announced
at a later date. Going a step beyond the recommendations of the Second
Narasimham Committee on introduction of market risk on Government and
approved securities, an additional risk weight of 20 per cent on
investments in the government guaranteed securities of Government
undertakings which do not form part of the market borrowing programme is
also being introduced. In order to provide sufficient time to banks to make
this provision, this requirement will come into effect year after next, i.e.,
financial year 2000-2001. In respect of the outstanding stock of such
securities in the portfolio as on March 31, 2000, banks will implement this
decision in two phases of 10 per cent each in 2001-2002 and 2002-2003.
• The risk weight for Government guaranteed advances which go into
default is being introduced with effect from the year ending March 31,
2000. (Please see Annexure for details).
• Foreign exchange open positions will carry 100 per cent risk weight with
effect from March 31, 1999.
• Banks are advised to introduce effective risk management systems to
cover credit risk, market risk and operational risk on a priority basis. To
this end, a comprehensive risk measurement approach should be adopted
and a detailed structure of operating limits, guidelines and other
parameters should be put in place. Banks have also been advised recently
to address market risks in a structured manner by adopting a more
comprehensive Asset-Liability Management Practices with effect from April
1, 1999. Guidelines on management of credit risk, market risk, operational
risk, etc., will be issued soon.
• Banks are being requested to ensure a loan review mechanism for larger
advances soon after its sanction and monitor any weakness that may
develop in such accounts for initiating timely corrective action.

14

29.

In implementing the recommendations of the Narasimham Committee,

care has been taken to phase them in a manner that reduces the risk
exposures of banks, strengthens financial soundness and contributes to
improved profitability outlook. RBI recognises that strengthening of capital
adequacy and prudential norms could pose some immediate resource
management problems, in particular for some public sector banks which are
constrained by legislation in their ability to raise further capital from the
market. The issue of capital support from Government and enhancing public
sector banks’ ability to access the capital market to meet their capital
requirements deserves to be debated and resolved at an early date as it is
central to ensuring the future financial viability of the banking sector.
30.

The Narasimham Committee had also made certain important

recommendations regarding reduction in Government/RBI shareholding in
public sector banks and on some other matters on which final decisions have
to be taken by Government of India. Decisions on these as well as certain
other recommendations would, however, entail amendments to the existing
Statutes/Acts.
(ii) Risk Weights and Exposure Norms on
Securities of Public Financial Institutions
31.

While investments in bonds/securities of some of the Public Financial

Institutions (PFIs) carry zero risk weight due to their status as `Approved
Securities’ under the special statutes governing them, investments in
bonds/debentures of certain other PFIs carry 100 per cent risk weight as the
relevant Act/Statute does not confer the status of an `Approved Security’.
With a view to removing this anomaly, risk weights on investments in
bonds/debentures of PFIs as defined under Section 4A of the Companies Act,
1956 (and certain other FIs notified by RBI) are being given a uniform risk
weight of 20 per cent.
32.

Investments in Central/State Government securities or in securities

guaranteed by them have hitherto been assigned zero risk weight. It is now

15

proposed to assign a risk weight of 2.5 per cent on account of market risk, as
stated earlier by March 31, 2000. However, in case of advances guaranteed
by the Government, non payment of guaranteed amount or a default in
interest/principal would attract risk weights as given in Annexure.
33.

It has also been decided that henceforth investments by banks in

bonds or debentures of a corporate guaranteed by a PFI will be treated as an
exposure by banks on the PFI and not on the corporate as is the practice at
present. Consequently, for the purpose of calculation of exposure norms, the
exposure of the bank on the PFI guaranteeing the bond or debenture issued
by corporates will be 100 per cent, whereas the exposure by the PFI on the
corporate will be to the extent of 50 per cent.

(iii) Payment and Settlement System
34.

For improving the conduct of monetary policy in the context of financial

market reforms and opening up of the economy, it is necessary to set in place
a robust integrated payment and settlement system. It is essential to
eliminate the costs to the financial system presently in existence due to
payment system floats, and large delays in processing and settling systems
and legal hurdles in settlements. The objective should be to bring about
operational efficiency, speed, better accuracy and timeliness of payment
transactions as also to contain financial risks in the national payments
system. For attaining this objective, the Reserve Bank has gone in for a
reliable communication backbone through the establishment of VSATnetwork. This network will expand in phases and over time, encompass the
entire financial sector. The setting up of this network provides us with an
opportunity as well as a challenge to carefully plan and design a strategy to
move towards real time gross settlement (RTGS) system which is adopted by
many major countries in the world. The RTGS system would cover all the
banking and financial market transactions, reduce transaction costs, and

16

improve efficiency in the transmission of channels of monetary policy. The
Reserve Bank has already instituted a Payment System Group (PSG) and a
VSAT user Group to deal with issues relating to RTGS system. Successful
implementation of RTGS system will, however, require active co-operation of
all the market participants, including commercial banks. The Reserve Bank
will take major initiatives in establishing such a system under the guidance of
a high level National Payments Council which will be set up soon.
(iv) Money and Government
Securities Markets
Money Market
35.

Development of an efficient and vibrant money market is an integral

part of financial liberalisation and often considered a pre-requisite for efficient
transmission of monetary policy. As development of instruments, institutions
and operating procedures form a vital part of money market development, the
Reserve Bank had taken a series of measures in recent years, which include
introduction of new instruments like the Certificates of Deposit (CDs),
Commercial Paper (CP) and inter-bank participations (IBPs), widening the
scope of participation and strengthening the institutional infrastructure. With
a view to providing an additional short-term avenue to investors, the scheme
of Money Market Mutual Funds (MMMFs) was introduced. Measures have
also been taken to increase the instruments and investor base in the Repo
market and to develop a term money market. The participants in the
call/notice money, bills rediscounting market and MMMFs have also been
increased.
36.

Measures relating to money market announced in the April 1998

statement, viz., reduction in the minimum size of operation per transaction
from Rs.5 crore to Rs.3 crore for entities routing their call money transactions
through primary dealers, and reduction from 30 days to 15 days in the
minimum lock-in period for Money Market Mutual Funds (MMMFs) and in the

17

period for transferability of Certificates of Deposit (CDs) have already been
implemented.
37.

The Narasimham Committee II had made some specific suggestions

relating to money market in order to facilitate an efficient integration of
financial markets.
•

The Committee’s suggestions that the minimum period of fixed deposits
could be reduced to 15 days and all money market instruments should
like-wise have a similar duration have already been implemented.

•

The Committee has observed that the call money market in India, unlike in
most well developed markets, is not strictly an inter-bank market and
since non-bank participants are not subjected to reserve requirements,
the market is often subject to volatility. In this context, the Committee has
recommended that the call/notice money market and term money market
should be strictly restricted to banks and primary dealers. In the
Committee’s view, non-bank parties can be provided free access to other
money market instruments like Commercial Paper (CP), CDs, bills
rediscounts, Treasury bills and MMMFs. The Reserve Bank concurs, in
principle, with the Committee on this matter, and aims to ultimately move
towards a pure inter-bank call/notice/term-money market including
primary dealers. This will be implemented in a manner that the existing
lenders in the market will have operational flexibility to adjust their assetliability structure. Simultaneously, measures will be taken to widen the
repo market and improve non-bank participation in a variety of other
instruments.

•

The RBI also agrees with the Committee’s suggestion that there must be
clearly defined prudent limits for banks’ reliance on the call money market.
It is expected that the Asset-Liability Management guidelines would
enable banks to organise their treasury operations without placing heavy
reliance on call money borrowings.

18

•

The RBI broadly agrees with the Committee’s suggestion that the RBI
support to the market should be through a Liquidity Adjustment Facility
(LAF) operated by way of repo providing a reasonable corridor for market
play. While it is recognised that the repo is technically an efficient route
for LAF, in view of certain procedural and technological constraints in
transfer and settlement of securities, it may not be possible to introduce a
scheme of LAF immediately. However, it has been decided to take all
actions that will enable, in due course, to replace the present general
refinance facility. The export credit refinance will continue as a separate
scheme and reviewed independently. Besides, collateralised intraday/over-night facility with adequate margin is also being considered to
facilitate smooth operation of payment and settlement system to be placed
eventually on real time gross settlements (RTGS) basis.

•

In line with the Committee’s view that the money market lacks a well
defined yield curve for short-term to long-term maturity and that an interbank reference rate like a LIBOR has to emerge, RBI has taken initiatives
in the recent past to develop a term money market as also to evolve a
reference rate. The most important of them is the initiative taken in April
1997 whereby inter-bank liabilities were exempted from the maintenance
of reserve requirements. It is expected that term money market will
develop once banks put in place proper ALM systems. A reassuring
feature has been that some agencies have already developed call money
linked reference rates.

38.

It may be recalled that the Reserve Bank of India had placed a

restriction of a minimum period of 3 days for ready-forward (repo)
transactions effective September 30, 1995. In the backdrop of the inter-bank
liabilities having been exempted from the requirements of maintenance of
CRR (except for the statutory minimum requirement of 3 per cent) and with a
view to enabling banks and other participants in the repo market to adjust
their liquidity in a more flexible manner, it has been decided to withdraw the

19

restriction of the minimum period for ready-forward (repo) transactions
effective from October 31, 1998.
39.

Product development is an integral part of improving market efficiency.

Some banks have proposed that interest rate swaps may be permitted with a
view to enabling them to hedge against interest rate risk arising out of assetliability mismatches. With a view to further deepen the money market as also
to enable banks, primary dealers and all-India financial institutions to hedge
interest rate risks, the Reserve Bank has decided, in principle, to create an
environment that would facilitate introduction of interest rate swaps. Those
who participate in the call/notice money market either as direct lenders or
borrowers are proposed to be permitted to undertake interest rate swaps. RBI
will examine, in consultation with market participants, relevant aspects such
as standard documentation, the back-up by underlying transactions between
parties, the bench-mark rate and maturity, and prudential prescriptions before
allowing the product in the market.
Government Securities Market
40.

The Government securities market constitutes the principal segment of

the debt market and serves as the benchmark for pricing corporate papers of
varying maturities.

With the objectives of broadening the market with a

diversified investor base and imparting greater liquidity and turnover,
concerted efforts have been made by Government of India and the Reserve
Bank in the direction of instrument development, institutional development
and towards improving market efficiency and transparency. The most
significant steps were the introduction of the auction system and of innovative
products as well as the setting up of a system of primary and satellite dealers.
41.

Some of the policy measures implemented since April 1997 include,

expansion of instruments eligible for repo/reverse repo transactions,
permitting a number of non-bank entities to enter into reverse repo
transactions, introduction of 14 day Treasury Bills, notifying of amounts in the
case of all the auctions, keeping “non-competitive” bids outside the notified

20

amount and entry of Foreign Institutional Investors (FIIs) in the government
securities market. A few announcements, such as, the introduction of 28 day
Treasury Bills, reintroduction of 182 day Treasury Bills and changes in
frequency of Treasury Bills auctions had to be put on hold since there was
reduced investor interest in Treasury Bills due to unprecedented market
developments. With the continuous availability of fixed rate repos for
absorption of liquidity, the proposal to use one day repos/reverse repos for
liquidity adjustment has also been deferred.
42.

The other recent initiatives for developing the Government securities

market include the move towards repeal of the Public Debt Act, 1944 and its
replacement by the Government Securities Act. The revised Bill has already
been approved by the Cabinet and is awaiting Parliament Clearance. Further,
the proposed changes in the Securities Contracts (Regulation) Act, 1956 will
pave way for a more active repos market and introduction of new market
features like when issued trading. It is also proposed to introduce a uniform
price auction method in respect of 91 day Treasury Bill auctions.
(v) Regulation of Non-banking
Financial Companies (NBFCs)
43.

Pursuant to the amendment to the RBI Act 1934 by Parliament, RBI

had instituted a comprehensive regulatory framework for NBFCs in January
1998 in respect of their deposit acceptance activities, prudential norms on
income recognition, accounting standard, asset classification, provisioning for
bad

and

doubtful

debts,

capital

adequacy,

credit

and

investment

concentration. In order to ensure that only the financially sound and well run
NBFCs could mobilise public deposits, obtaining of minimum investment
grade credit rating from one of the credit rating agencies was made
mandatory and ceilings on the quantum of public deposits were correlated to
the level of their credit rating. Of about 9,000 applications of NBFCs found to
be eligible for registration on the basis of minimum Net Owned Fund (NOF) of
Rs.25 lakh, RBI has already decided on the applications of 7,300 companies.

21

The entire process of registration is expected to be completed by the end of
December, 1998.
44.

The appropriate regulation of NBFCs is a complex task in view of the

large number of NBFCs which are spread all over the country. NBFCs
perform an important financing role in the economy particularly in respect of
small scale and decentralised sector and provide important employment and
entrepreneurial opportunities at the ground level. However, prevalence of
unethical financial practices as well as lack of transparency in operations
have also been marked in the case of some sections of the NBFC sector.
These have resulted in widespread complaints from depositors about their
functioning. Taking into account both the positive as well as the negative
aspects of the NBFC sector, RBI and Government have been open to
suggestions and advice from experts and market participants to further refine
the regulatory framework for NBFCs, develop self-regulatory mechanism for
smaller NBFCs, and improve operational effectiveness.
45.

In order to undertake a comprehensive examination of the regulatory

experience so far and the problems that have arisen on the ground, the
government had set up a Task Force to make further recommendations for
effective regulation of the NBFC sector. RBI was closely associated with the
work of the Task Force. Proposals of the Task Force are now under
consideration of the Government. RBI will make appropriate changes in the
regulatory framework as soon as decisions of the Government, including any
legislative changes that may be required to give effect to Task Force
recommendations become available. Until then, NBFCs are advised to strictly
adhere to the current regulations in force.
46.

An investors’ information programme is also being carried out by RBI

to ensure that investors are fully aware of the prescribed ceiling on interest
rates, disclosure requirements, unsecured nature of deposits and other
features of NBFC operations.

22

Mumbai,
October 30, 1998

.ANNEXURE
Recommendations of the Committee on
Banking Sector Reforms

Recommendations
(i)

Decisions taken

5 per cent weight for market
risk for Government/approved
securities
(Para No.3.11)

23

To be implemented in phases:
2.5 per cent risk weight by the year
ending March 31, 2000. Balance of 2.5
per cent will be announced later. An
additional risk weight (of 20 per cent) is
proposed for securities of government
undertakings which do not form part of
the
approved
market
borrowing
programme with effect from the
financial year 2000-2001. This will be
implemented in the case of outstanding

stock of such securities as on March
31, 2000, in two phases at the rate of
10 per cent each in 2001-2002 and
2002-2003.
(ii)

The risk weight for Government Risk weights will be assigned for Govt.
guaranteed advances to be the guaranteed advances sanctioned from
same as for other advances
April 1, 1999 as under:
(Para No.3.12)
Against the guarantee of the :
[a] Central Government : 0 per cent
[b] State Governments
: 0 per cent
[c] Governments who
remained defaulters
as on March 31, 2000 : 20 per cent
[d] Governments who
continued to be
defaulters after
March 31, 2001
: 100 per cent

(iii)

Foreign exchange open position To be implemented from the current
limit to carry 100 per cent risk financial year ending March 31, 1999.
weight.
(Para No.3.13)

(iv)

A minimum target of 9 per cent
CRAR to be achieved in the year
2000 and 10 per cent by 2002.
(Para No.3.15 & 3.16)

Banks should achieve a minimum
CRAR of 9 per cent as on March 31,
2000.
Decision
about
further
enhancement of CRAR will be
announced later.

(v)

An asset be classified as doubtful
if it is in the sub standard category
for 18 months in the first instance
and eventually for 12 months and
loss if it has been so identified but
not written off.
(Para No.3.18)

An asset will be treated as doubtful, if it
has remained in substandard category
for 18 months instead of 24 months, by
March 31, 2001. Banks may make
provisions therefor, in two phases as
under:
As on March 31, 2001: Provisioning of
not less than 50 per cent on the assets
which have become doubtful on
account of the new norms, i.e.,
reduction of the period from 24 months
to 18 months.
As on March 31, 2002 : Balance 50 per
cent of the provisions should be made
in addition to the provisions needed as
on March 31, 2002.
The proposal to introduce the norm of

24

12 months will be announced later.
(vi) [a]

The
Government
guaranteed
advances which have turned sticky
to be classified as NPAs.
(Para No.3.21)

[b]

Income
recognition,
asset
classification and provisioning
norms should apply to Government
guaranteed advances in the same
manner as for any other advances.
(Para No.3.37)

The Government guaranteed advances
which have turned sticky are to be
classified as NPAs as per the existing
prudential norms with effect from April
1, 2000.
Provisions on these advances should
be made over a period of 4 years as
detailed below:
Existing/old Government guaranteed
advances which would become NPA on
account of asset classification norms
are to be fully provided for during the
next four years from the year ending
March 1999 to March 2002 with a
minimum of 25 per cent, each year.

(vii)

A general provision of 1per cent on To start with, banks should make a
general provision of a minimum of 0.25
standard assets be introduced.
per cent for the year ending March 31,
(Para No.3.36)
2000. The decision to raise further the
provisioning requirement on standard
assets would be announced in due
course.

(viii)

Banks and Financial Institutions The Reserve Bank reiterates that banks
should avoid the practice of and financial institutions should adhere
to the prudential norms on asset
evergreening. (Para No.3.22)
classification, provisioning, etc., and
avoid the practice of “evergreening”.

(ix)

Any effort at financial restructuring
must go hand in hand with
operational restructuring. With the
cleaning up of the Balance sheet,
simultaneously steps to be taken
to prevent/limit re-emergence of
new NPAs.
(Para No.3.27)

The banks are advised to take effective
steps for reduction of NPAs and also
put in place risk management systems
and practices to prevent reemergence
of fresh NPAs.

(x)

To enable banks in difficulties to
issue bonds for Tier II capital.
Government will need to guarantee
these instruments which would
then make them eligible for SLR
investment.
(Para No.3.29)

Public Sector Banks are encouraged to
raise their Tier II capital. Government
guarantee to these instruments does
not seem appropriate.

(xi)

There is a need for disclosure in a Banks have already been advised to

25

phased manner of the maturity
pattern of asset and liabilities,
foreign currency assets and
liabilities, movements in provision
account and NPAs.
(Para No.3.38)

put in place a formal Asset-Liability
Management (ALM) system with effect
from April 1, 1999. Instructions on
further disclosures will be issued in due
course.

(xii)

Concentration ratios need to be Banks are advised to strictly comply
indicated in respect of bank’s with instructions which are already in
exposure
to
any
particular place.
industrial sector as also to sectors
sensitive to asset price fluctuations
such as stock market and real
estate. These exposure norms
need to be carefully monitored.
(Para No.3.40)

(xiii)

Banks should bring out revised Arrangements should be put in place
operational manuals and update for regular updating. Compliance has to
them regularly. (Para No.4.3)
be reported to RBI by April 30, 1999.

(xiv)

There is need to institute an
independent
loan
review
mechanism especially for large
borrowal accounts and to identify
potential NPAs.
(Para 4.12-4.16)

Banks should ensure a loan review
mechanism for larger advances soon
after its sanction and continuously
monitor the weaknesses developing in
the accounts for initiating corrective
measures in time.

Note: Detailed circulars where necessary on the above
decisions are being issued separately.

26

