RESERVE BANK OF INDIA

Second Quarter Review of
Monetary Policy 2012-13
(Including Review of Developmental and Regulatory Policies)

Dr. D. Subbarao
Governor

October 30, 2012
Mumbai
i

ii

CONTENTS
Page No.

Part A. Monetary Policy
I.

The State of the Economy ............................................................. 2

II.

Outlook and Projections ................................................................ 6

III.

The Policy Stance ........................................................................ 11

IV.

Monetary Measures ..................................................................... 11

Part B. Developmental and Regulatory Policies
I.

Interest Rate Policy...................................................................... 14

II.

Financial Markets ........................................................................ 14

III.

Financial Stability ........................................................................ 16

IV.

Credit Delivery and Financial Inclusion .................................... 16

V.

Regulatory and Supervisory Measures ....................................... 20

VI.

Institutional Developments ......................................................... 26

iii

iv

ABBREVIATIONS
AEs

-

Advanced Economies

ANBC

-

Adjusted Net Bank Credit

ATM

-

Automated Teller Machine

BCBS

-

Basel Committee on Banking Supervision

BOS

-

Banking Ombudsman Scheme

BRICS

- Brazil, Russia, India, China and South Africa

CAMELS

- Capital Adequacy, Asset Quality, Management, Earning, Liquidity, and
System and Control

CCP

- Central Counterparty

CE

- Credit Equivalent

CEO

- Chief Executive Officer

CI

- Confidence Interval

CICs

- Credit Information Companies

CMDs

- Chairman and Managing Directors

CPI

- Consumer Price Index

CRAR

- Capital to Risk-Weighted Assets Ratio

CRR

- Cash Reserve Ratio

CTS

- Cheque Truncation System

DCCB

- District Central Co-operative Bank

ECB

- European Central Bank/External Commercial Borrowing

EDEs

- Emerging and Developing Economies

FCs

- Financial Conglomerates

FDI

- Foreign Direct Investment

FEMA

- Foreign Exchange and Management Act

FII

- Foreign Institutional Investors

FQR

- First Quarter Review

FRA

- Forward Rate Agreement

FSB

- Financial Stability Board
v

iii

FSDC

- Financial Stability and Development Council

FSR

- Financial Stability Report

GDP

- Gross Domestic Product

GFD

- Gross Fiscal Deficit

G-secs

- Government Securities

H

- Half Year

HFCs

- Housing Finance Companies

HLSC

- High Level Steering Committee

HTM

- Held to Maturity

IBA

- Indian Banks’ Association

IFSC

- Indian Financial System Code

IIP

- Index of Industrial Production

IMF

- International Monetary Fund

IOS

- Industrial Outlook Survey

IRFs

- Interest Rate Futures

IRS

- Interest Rate Swaps

IT

- Information Technology

ITEs

- Intra-Group Transactions and Exposures

KYC

- Know Your Customer

LAB

- Local Area Bank

LAF

- Liquidity Adjustment Facility

LPA

- Long Period Average

M3

- Broad Money

MDR

- Merchant Discount Rate

MIS

- Management Information System

MITCs

- Most Important Terms and Conditions

MQR

- Mid-Quarter Review

MSEs

- Micro and Small Enterprises

MSF

-

MSMEs

- Micro, Small and Medium Enterprises

MSMED

- Micro, Small and Medium Enterprises Development

Marginal Standing Facility

iii

MT

- Million Tonnes

NABARD

- National Bank for Agriculture and Rural Development

NBFCs

- Non-Banking Financial Companies

NDTL

- Net Demand and Time Liabilities

NEFT

- National Electronic Funds Transfer

NPAs

- Non-Performing Assets

NPCI

- National Payments Corporation of India

OBE

- Off-Balance Sheet Exposure

OBICUS

- Order Books, Inventories and Capacity Utilisation Survey

OTC

- Over-the-Counter

PMI

- Purchasing Managers’ Index

PML

- Prevention of Money Laundering

POS

- Point-of-Sale

Q

- Quarterly

RBS

- Risk Based Supervision

RD

- Revenue Deficit

RRB

- Regional Rural Bank

SIFI

- Systemically Important Financial Institution

SLBC

- State Level Bankers’ Committee

SLR

- Statutory Liquidity Ratio

SQR

- Second Quarter Review

StCB

- State Co-operative Bank

STCCS

- Short-Term Co-operative Credit Structure

T-Bill

- Treasury Bill

UCB

- Urban Co-operative Bank

UID

- Unique Identification Number

UK

-

US

- United States of America

WEO

- World Economic Outlook

WPI

- Wholesale Price Index

Y-o-Y

- Year-on-Year

United Kingdom

iii

Reserve Bank of India
Second Quarter Review of Monetary Policy 2012-13

By
Dr. D. Subbarao
Introduction
Over the last quarter, policymakers around the world have confronted increasingly
difficult challenges. Globally, even as the growth momentum has slowed, governments have
had to manage the balance between fiscal consolidation and growth stimulus amidst visible
signs that the two objectives are in conflict with each other. As the advanced economies
(AEs) deal with these tensions and global demand conditions weaken, emerging and
developing economies (EDEs) are also slowing down.
2.
Liquidity infusions by central banks in AEs during the quarter have contributed to
some stability in global financial markets. These measures cannot, however, substitute for
robust structural solutions that can return the AEs to the path of recovery. At this stage,
growth risks have risen and could well overwhelm the positive effects of enhanced liquidity.
Moreover, with commodity prices still at elevated levels, notwithstanding some muted
softening recently, risks of liquidity-driven price increases remain significant. Even as this
process moves forward, the months ahead will be a period of heightened uncertainty for the
global economy.
3.
Amidst this global slowdown and uncertainty, the Indian economy remains sluggish,
held down by stalled investment, weakening consumption and declining exports. However,
recent policy initiatives undertaken by the Government have begun to dispel pervasive
negative sentiments. As the measures already announced are implemented and further
reforms are initiated, they should help improve the investment climate further.
4.
Meanwhile, the persistence of inflationary pressures even as growth has moderated,
remains a key challenge. In this respect, India is an exception to the global trend, which
underscores the role of domestic structural factors. Of particular concern is the stickiness of
core inflation, mainly on account of supply constraints and the cost-push of rupee
depreciation. Consequently, managing inflation and inflation expectations must remain the
primary focus of monetary policy. A central premise of monetary policy is that low and
stable inflation and well-anchored inflation expectations contribute to a conducive
investment climate and consumer confidence, which is key to sustained growth on a higher
trajectory in the medium-term.
1

5.
Accordingly, over the past few quarters, monetary policy had to focus on inflation,
even as growth risks have increased. As recent policy initiatives by the Government start
yielding results in terms of revitalising activity, they will open up space for monetary policy
to work in concert to stimulate growth. However, in doing so, it is important not to lose sight
of the primary objective of managing inflation and inflation expectations.
6.
This policy review is set in the context of the above global and domestic concerns. It
should be read and understood together with the detailed review in Macroeconomic and
Monetary Developments released yesterday by the Reserve Bank.
7.
The Statement is organised in two parts. Part A covers Monetary Policy and is
divided into four sections: Section I provides an overview of global and domestic
macroeconomic developments; Section II sets out the outlook and projections for growth,
inflation and monetary aggregates; Section III explains the stance of monetary policy; and
Section IV specifies the monetary measures. Part B covers Developmental and Regulatory
Policies and is organised in six sections: Interest Rate Policy (Section I); Financial Markets
(Section II); Financial Stability (Section III); Credit Delivery and Financial Inclusion
(Section IV); Regulatory and Supervisory Measures (Section V); and Institutional
Developments (Section VI).

Part A. Monetary Policy
I. The State of the Economy
Global Economy
8.
Notwithstanding modest improvement in growth performance in parts of the world in
Q3 of 2012, the global economy remains sluggish. In the US, growth in Q3 picked up
relative to the earlier quarter. In the UK, after three consecutive quarters of contraction,
growth turned positive in Q3. The euro area continued to experience contraction in output in
Q2, and recessionary headwinds have persisted in Q3. Growth decelerated significantly in
Japan. High unemployment relative to trend persisted in all major AEs, although in
September the US unemployment rate declined to below 8 per cent for the first time in four
years. As regards the other BRICS – Brazil, Russia, China and South Africa – they have also
slowed in the first half of 2012, with China decelerating further in Q3. Reinforcing this
perspective, the average level of the global composite PMI for Q3 remained nearly
unchanged from the three year low in the previous quarter.
9.
In September, additional quantitative easing measures were announced by the US
Fed, the European Central Bank and the Bank of Japan to which financial markets responded

2

positively as reflected in the prices of risky assets and narrowing of spreads. According to
the October 2012 Global Financial Stability Report of the IMF, however, risks to financial
stability have increased since April as confidence in the global financial system remains
fragile, notwithstanding greater monetary accommodation by central banks.

Domestic Economy
10.
The loss of growth momentum that started in 2011-12 has extended into 2012-13
though the pace of deceleration moderated in Q1. Nevertheless, growth remains below trend
and persisting weakness in investment activity has clouded the outlook.
11.
After decelerating over four successive quarters from 9.2 per cent y-o-y in Q4 of
2010-11 to 5.3 per cent in Q4 of 2011-12, GDP growth was marginally higher at 5.5 per cent
in Q1 of 2012-13. The slight improvement in GDP growth in Q1 of 2012-13 was mainly
driven by growth in construction, and supported by better than expected growth in
agriculture.
12.
On the expenditure side, the growth of gross fixed capital formation decelerated from
14.7 per cent in Q1 of 2011-12 to 0.7 per cent in Q1 of 2012-13. The slowdown in growth of
private consumption expenditure witnessed during Q4 of 2011-12 continued through Q1 of
2012-13. External demand conditions and crude oil prices have also remained unfavourable,
adversely impacting net exports.
13.
After declining for two consecutive months, the index of industrial production (IIP)
posted a modest growth of 2.7 per cent in August. The upturn was visible in mining and
manufacturing sectors. However, over the period April-August, industrial activity was
lacklustre at 0.4 per cent as against 5.6 per cent during the corresponding period last year.
Most significantly, reflecting the retrenchment of investment demand, capital goods
production declined by 13.8 per cent during April-August.
14.
The seasonally adjusted manufacturing PMI in September was unchanged relative to
its August level, but was below its level in June. The headline services business activity
index, seasonally adjusted, was marginally higher in September than in August.
15.
Notwithstanding apprehensions earlier in the season, rainfall deficiency during the
south-west monsoon was 8 per cent of the long period average (LPA). However, the uneven
temporal and spatial distribution of the monsoon this year is expected to adversely impact
the Kharif output. According to the first advance estimates, production of Kharif foodgrains
at 117.2 million tonnes (MT) in 2012-13 will be lower by 9.8 per cent than the record output
in the previous year.
16.
According to the Reserve Bank’s order books, inventories and capacity utilisation
survey (OBICUS), capacity utilisation of the manufacturing sector in Q1 of 2012-13
3

declined from the preceding quarter and a year ago. For Q2, business confidence, as
measured by the business expectations index of the Reserve Bank’s industrial outlook survey
(IOS), dipped relative to the previous quarter.
17.
Headline WPI inflation remained sticky at above 7.5 per cent on a y-o-y basis through
the first half of 2012-13. Furthermore, in September there was a pick-up in the momentum of
headline inflation, driven by the increase in fuel prices and elevated price levels of non-food
manufactured products. While this is in part attributable to some suppressed inflation in the
form of earlier under-pricing being corrected, even after this, the momentum remains firm.
18.
Even while y-o-y inflation of WPI primary food articles moderated since July due to
the softening of prices of vegetables, prices of cereal and protein-based items such as pulses,
eggs, fish and meat edged up. WPI food products inflation increased in September, mainly
due to the firming up of the prices of sugar, edible oils and grain mill products.
19.
Fuel group inflation registered a significant rise in September, primarily due to the
WPI reflecting the sharp increase in prices of electricity effected from June, the partial
impact of the increase in prices of diesel in mid-September and significant increase in nonadministered fuel prices on account of rising global crude prices.
20.
Non-food manufactured products inflation was persistent at 5.6 per cent through JulySeptember and continued to exhibit upside pressures from firm prices of metal products and
other inputs and intermediates, especially goods with high import content due to the rupee
depreciation. The momentum indicator of non-food manufactured products inflation
(seasonally adjusted 3-month moving average annualised inflation rate) also remained high.
21.
The new combined (rural and urban) CPI (Base: 2010=100) inflation remained
elevated, reflecting the build-up of food price pressures. CPI inflation excluding food and
fuel groups ebbed slightly during June-September, from double digits earlier. Inflation based
on the CPI for industrial workers recorded an upturn, primarily due to higher food inflation.
The y-o-y increase in rural wages, though showing some moderation, has remained high.
22.
Reflecting some softening in inflation from the high levels observed in the last two
years, urban households’ inflation expectations showed a marginal decline in Q2 of 2012-13,
though they remained in double digits.
23.
The Reserve Bank’s quarterly house price index suggests that house price inflation
remained firm in Q1 of 2012-13. Notwithstanding the increase in house prices, the volume of
housing transactions grew y-o-y at a faster pace than in the preceding quarter.
24.
An analysis of corporate performance in Q1 of 2012-13, based on a common sample
of 2,308 non-government non-financial companies, indicates that y-o-y sales growth
decelerated sequentially over the last three quarters, but remained positive after adjusting for
inflation. Earnings, however, contracted sharply due to higher increase in expenditure
4

relative to sales, indicating a decline in pricing power. The early results for Q2 of 2012-13
indicate that the drop in sales growth and earnings may be bottoming out.
25.
Money supply (M3 ) moderated y-o-y to 13.3 per cent on October 5, 2012, lower than
the indicative projection of 15 per cent set out in the Monetary Policy Statement 2012-13.
This essentially reflected the deceleration of growth in aggregate deposits. Non-food credit
growth at 15.4 per cent y-o-y was below the indicative projection of 17 per cent, reflecting
the growth slowdown. Disaggregated data show that barring agriculture, credit growth
decelerated on a y-o-y basis across all the major sectors, particularly infrastructure.
26.
The estimated total flow of financial resources from banks, non-banks and external
sources to the commercial sector at around `4,700 billion in 2012-13 (up to October 5, 2012)
was lower than `5,000 billion during the corresponding period of last year. Apart from the
decline in the flow of resources from banks, the flow from external sources declined on
account of lower external commercial borrowings (ECBs) and foreign direct investment
(FDI) into India.
27.
Following the cut in the policy repo rate in April and the cash reserve ratio (CRR) in
September, several commercial banks reduced their deposit and lending rates. During H1 of
2012-13, the modal deposit rates of scheduled commercial banks declined by 13 bps across
all maturities and the modal base rate of banks also declined by 25 bps.
28.
Liquidity conditions, as reflected in the average net borrowing under the LAF at `486
billion during July-September remained within the comfort zone of (+/-) one per cent of
NDTL. However, liquidity conditions tightened in October, mainly on account of the buildup in the Centre’s cash balances and the seasonal increase in currency demand, taking the
average LAF borrowing to `871 billion during October 15-25, well above the band of (+/-)
one per cent of NDTL.
29.
During April-August, the Centre’s fiscal deficit was nearly two-thirds of the budget
estimate for the year as a whole. In view of evolving patterns of revenues and non-plan
expenditure, the revenue deficit (RD) and the gross fiscal deficit (GFD) for 2012-13 are
expected to be higher than budgeted.
30.
During Q2 of 2012-13, yields on government securities (G-secs) eased and have
remained range-bound in October. Equity markets also improved in Q2 of 2012-13 on
account of revival in sentiment and the turnaround in foreign institutional investor (FII)
inflows.
31.
The adverse external environment and, in particular, the slump in world trade took
its toll on export performance. Exports declined in September for the fifth month in
succession. However, with imports also declining, the trade deficit in H1 of 2012 -13
remained broadly at the same level as a year ago. In terms of external financing, net inflows

5

on account of FDI and ECBs were sizably lower than in the first half of the preceding year,
but the shortfall was largely offset by a surge in non-resident deposits and a turnaround in
FII flows in Q2. Reflecting these developments, the nominal exchange rate of the rupee visa-vis the US dollar moved within a relatively narrow range during Q2 compared with its
behaviour in Q1. Overall, in H1 of 2012-13, the rupee depreciated in nominal terms by 7.8
per cent. In real terms, it depreciated by 5.4 per cent. The impact of real depreciation on net
exports is being offset by global demand conditions.

II. Outlook and Projections
Global Outlook
Growth
32.
Global growth prospects have deteriorated further and downside risks have increased,
even as monetary policy in AEs remains supportive. Much depends on concrete policy
actions in the euro area to ease the sovereign debt stress, balance growth-friendly structural
reforms with fiscal consolidation, and carry forward integration at the area level, particularly
in banking and fiscal domains. In the US, determined political resolve to agree on a credible
medium-term fiscal consolidation strategy is critical to averting the fiscal cliff and to avoid
once again encountering the debt ceiling deadline. In the absence of these efforts, the outlook
for AEs appears bleak, with the risks of a prolonged downturn more real than before.
Spillovers from AEs present a serious downside risk to the prospects for EDEs,
notwithstanding their relatively stronger fundamentals and absence of financial strains.
33.
In its October 2012 World Economic Outlook (WEO), the IMF scaled down its
projection of world GDP growth for 2012 to 3.3 per cent from its July projections of 3.5 per
cent, and for 2013 to 3.6 per cent from its earlier projection of 3.9 per cent. Since September
2011, the IMF has been scaling down its projection of global growth for 2012, evidencing
persistent and more than anticipated weakness in the global economy.
Inflation
34.
According to the IMF (WEO, October 2012), consumer price inflation is likely to
decline from 1.9 per cent in 2012 to 1.6 per cent in 2013 in AEs, and from 6.1 per cent to 5.8
per cent in EDEs. As a result of weakening of global economic activity, headline and core
inflation are expected to ease. However, risks to this outlook remain as global commodity
prices, particularly of crude oil, have corrected only marginally. Further accommodation in
monetary policy in major AEs is likely to work in conjunction with supply constraints to
keep commodity prices elevated and volatile.
Domestic Outlook
6

Growth
35.
In its April 2012 Policy, the Reserve Bank projected GDP growth for 2012-13 at 7.3
per cent. In the First Quarter Review (FQR) of July, this was revised downwards to 6.5 per
cent on an assessment that risks to domestic growth from the global slowdown, weak
industrial activity and slower growth of services had materialised. By the time of the MidQuarter Review (MQR) of September, growth risks had heightened on account of worsening
global macroeconomic conditions, decline in domestic industrial activity and service sector
growth falling below trend.
36.
Since then, global risks have increased further and domestic risks have become
accentuated by halted investment demand, moderation in consumption spending and
continuing erosion in export competitiveness accompanied by weakening business and
consumer confidence. Although industrial output picked up marginally in August and the
services PMI showed a modest improvement in September, the outlook remains uncertain.
Notwithstanding the improvement in rainfall in the months of August and September, the
first advance estimates of the 2012 kharif production are somewhat less buoyant in
comparison to the previous year. Accordingly, even while prospects for agriculture appear
resilient, the overall outlook for economic activity remains subdued. On these
considerations, the baseline projection of GDP growth for 2012-13 is revised downwards to
5.8 per cent (Chart 1).

7

Inflation
37.
Looking ahead, the path of inflation will be shaped by two sets of counteracting
forces. On the downside, slower growth and excess capacity in some sectors will help
moderate core inflation. Stable, or in the best case scenario, declining commodity prices
will reinforce this tendency. An appreciating rupee will also help to contain inflationary
pressures by bringing down the rupee cost of imports, especially of commodities. On the
upside, persistent supply constraints may be aggravated as demand revives, resulting in
price pressures. Rupee depreciation, which may result from global financial instability, will
add to imported inflation. An important driver of inflation is the upsurge in both rural and
urban wages, which is exerting cost-push pressures. Finally, as under-pricing in several
products is corrected as part of the fiscal consolidation process, suppressed inflation is
being brought into the open. As necessary a step as this is, it will result in higher inflation
readings.
38.
Taking into consideration the above factors, the baseline projection for headline WPI
inflation for March 2013 is raised to 7.5 per cent from 7.0 per cent indicated in July (Chart
2). Importantly, it is expected to rise somewhat in Q3 before beginning to ease in Q4.

39.
Although inflation has remained persistently high over the past two years, it is
important to note that during the 2000s, it averaged around 5.5 per cent, both in terms of
WPI and CPI, down from its earlier trend rate of about 7.5 per cent. Given this record, the
conduct of monetary policy will continue to condition and contain perception of inflation in

8

the range of 4.0-4.5 per cent. This is in line with the medium-term objective of 3.0 per cent
inflation consistent with India’s broader integration into the global economy.
Monetary Aggregates
40.
Money supply (M 3), deposit and credit growth have so far trailed below the indicative
trajectories of the Reserve Bank indicated in the April Policy and reiterated in the July
Review. Deposit growth has decelerated with the moderation in interest rates, especially
term deposits. Credit growth has ebbed with the slowdown in investment demand, especially
with regard to infrastructure, and lower absorption of credit by industry, in general. Keeping
in view the developments during the year so far and the usual year-end pick-up, the
trajectories of the monetary aggregates for 2012-13 are projected at 14.0 per cent for M3,
15.0 per cent for deposit growth and 16.0 per cent for growth of non-food credit. As always,
these numbers are indicative projections and not targets.
41.
The wedge between deposit growth and credit growth, in conjunction with the buildup of the Centre’s cash balances from mid-September and the drainage of liquidity on
account of festival-related step-up in currency demand, have kept the system level liquidity
deficit high, with adverse implications for the flow of credit to productive sectors and for the
overall growth of the economy going forward.
Risk Factors
42.
The projections of growth and inflation
2012-13 are subject to several risks as detailed below:

for

the

remaining

part

of

i) Downside risks to growth emanating from the global macroeconomic environment are
now adjudged to be more elevated than at the time of the FQR of July and the MQR of
September. Weak growth momentum and policy uncertainties are impacting the
macroeconomic outlook of EDEs. Spillovers to the Indian economy through trade,
finance and confidence channels could increase. Domestically, a revival in investment
activity, which is key to stimulating growth, depends on a number of factors. In
particular, recent policy announcements by the Government, which have positively
impacted sentiment, need to be translated into effective action to convert sentiment into
concrete investment decisions.
ii) On the inflation front, despite recent moderation, global commodity prices remain high.
While oil prices appear to have stabilised, balancing between weak demand prospects
and abundant liquidity, upside risks from persistently high liquidity and geopolitical
developments remain. Further, domestic prices of administered petroleum products do
not reflect the full pass-through of global commodity prices, and under-recoveries persist.
While corrections are welcome from the viewpoint of overall macroeconomic stability,
their second-round effects on inflation will have to be guarded against. As regards food
9

prices, drought conditions in important foodgrain producing areas of the world are likely
to impart an upside and persistent bias to international food prices with adverse
implications for all countries that have relatively high weights for food in their inflation
indicators. The behaviour of food inflation will also depend on the supply response in
respect of those commodities characterised by structural imbalances, particularly protein
items. Finally, the persistent increase in rural and urban wages, unaccompanied by
commensurate productivity increases, is also a source of inflationary pressures.
iii) The large twin deficits, i.e., the current account deficit and the fiscal deficit continue to
pose significant risks to both growth and macroeconomic stability. A large current
account deficit poses challenges for financing it in the current global environment. In a
situation of volatile capital flows, the deficit could exacerbate downward pressures on the
rupee. A persistently large fiscal deficit reduces the space for a revival in private
spending, particularly investment spending, without quickly re-kindling inflationary
pressures.
iv) Liquidity pressures pose risks to credit availability for productive purposes and could
affect overall investment and growth prospects adversely. On the other hand, excess
liquidity could aggravate inflation risks.

III. The Policy Stance
43.
In response to rising inflation pressures in the period January 2010 - October 2011,
the Reserve Bank started monetary tightening. This helped in moderating inflation from its
peak of 10.9 per cent in April 2010 to an average level of 7.5 per cent over the period
January-August 2012. Over this period, however, growth slowed down and is currently
below trend. This slowdown is due to a host of factors, including monetary tightening.
44.
Since April 2012, the monetary policy stance has sought to balance the growth–
inflation dynamic through calibrated easing. The transmission of these policy impulses
through the economy is underway, and in conjunction with the fiscal and other measures
recently announced, should work towards arresting the loss of growth momentum over the
next few months. As inflation eases further, there will be an opportunity for monetary
policy to act in conjunction with fiscal and other measures to mitigate the growth risks and
take the economy to a sustained higher growth trajectory.
45.
It is important, however, to note that inflation turned up again in September. To some
extent, this reflected the partial pass-through of revisions of diesel and electricity prices
which, notwithstanding their contribution to inflation, were absolutely necessary. Besides,
underlying inflationary pressures reflected in non-food manufactured products inflation has
remained stubbornly above comfort levels. Accordingly, it is critical that even as the
10

monetary policy stance shifts further towards addressing growth risks, the objective of
containing inflation and anchoring inflation expectations is not de-emphasised.
46.

Against this backdrop, the stance of monetary policy is intended to:

 manage liquidity to ensure adequate flow of credit to the productive sectors of the
economy;
 reinforce the positive impact of government policy actions on growth as inflation risks
moderate; and
 maintain an interest rate environment to contain inflation and anchor inflation
expectations.

IV. Monetary Measures
47.
On the basis of current assessment and in line with the policy stance outlined in
Section III, the Reserve Bank announces the following policy measures:
Cash Reserve Ratio
48.


It has been decided to:
reduce the cash reserve ratio (CRR) of scheduled banks by 25 basis points from 4.5 per
cent to 4.25 per cent of their net demand and time liabilities (NDTL) effective the
fortnight beginning November 3, 2012.

49.
As as result of this reduction in the CRR, around `175 billion of primary liquidity
will be injected into the banking system.
Repo Rate
50.
The policy repo rate under the liquidity adjustment facility (LAF) has been retained at
8.0 per cent.
Reverse Repo Rate
51.
The reverse repo rate under the LAF, determined with a spread of 100 basis points
below the repo rate, stands at 7.0 per cent.
Marginal Standing Facility (MSF) Rate
52.
The Marginal Standing Facility (MSF) rate, determined with a spread of 100 basis
points above the repo rate, stands at 9.0 per cent.

11

Bank Rate
53.

The Bank Rate stands at 9.0 per cent.

Guidance
54.
The reduction in the CRR is intended to pre-empt a prospective tightening of liquidity
conditions, thereby keeping liquidity comfortable to support growth. It anticipates the
projected inflation trajectory which indicates a rise in inflation before easing in the last
quarter. While risks to this trajectory remain, the baseline scenario suggests a reasonable
likelihood of further policy easing in the fourth quarter of 2012-13. The above policy
guidance will, however, be conditioned by the evolving growth-inflation dynamic.

Expected Outcomes
55.

These actions and the guidance that is given are expected to:

i. enable liquidity conditions to facilitate a turnaround in credit growth to productive
sectors so as to support growth;
ii. reinforce the growth stimulus of the policy actions announced by the Government as
inflation risks moderate; and
iii. anchor medium-term inflation expectations on the basis of a credible commitment to low
and stable inflation.

Mid-Quarter Review of Monetary Policy 2012-13
56.
The next Mid-Quarter Review of Monetary Policy for 2012-13 will be announced
through a press release on Tuesday, December 18, 2012.

Third Quarter Review of Monetary Policy 2012-13
57.
The Third Quarter Review of Monetary Policy for 2012-13 is scheduled for Tuesday,
January 29, 2013.

12

Part B. Developmental and Regulatory Policies
58.
This part of the Statement reviews the progress on various developmental and
regulatory policy measures announced by the Reserve Bank in recent policy statements and
also sets out new measures.
59.
Since the Monetary Policy Statement of April 2012, risks to global financial stability
have increased, despite some improvement in markets associated with exceptional liquidity
operations. In advanced economies, significant fiscal challenges could morph into broader
macro-financial concerns. For emerging and developing economies (EDEs), financial
stability risks are embedded in potential spillovers, apart from those associated with
domestic challenges of managing slowdown in growth, while countering lingering
inflationary pressures in some. These unsettled conditions have nevertheless spurred
movements towards globalised regulatory reforms intended to make financial systems safer,
less complex and more transparent, and financial institutions less leveraged, better
capitalised and thus able to effectively manage various risks. Many of these reforms are at
various stages of implementation.
60.
In India, in the face of a challenging global environment and a difficult growthinflation dynamic, developmental and regulatory policies have focused on building a sound,
efficient and vibrant financial system that ensures the effective provision of financial
services to the widest sections of society. Financial sector reforms have moved in step with
evolving international best practices, but with a country-specific orientation. Accordingly,
financial market development, credit quality, credit delivery, customer service and financial
inclusion within a participative and consultative approach with involvement of all
stakeholders have been pursued.
61.
This review of Developmental and Regulatory Policies for SQR of Monetary Policy
2012-13 focuses on certain key areas while assessing the progress made on the measures
instituted in recent policy statements: reviewing interest rate policies and products; carrying
forward financial market development and strengthening the market infrastructure,
including payment and settlement systems; further improving credit delivery and financial
inclusion; expanding customer service initiatives; upgrading the regulatory and supervisory
framework in terms of progress towards Basel III, risk based supervision (RBS), nonperforming assets (NPAs) management/restructuring and resolution frameworks; and
strengthening currency management.

13

I. Interest Rate Policy
Fixed Interest Rate Products
62.
In the Monetary Policy Statement of April 2012, it was noted that while interest
rates on deposits are predominantly fixed, most of the retail loan products, espe cially
home loans, are sanctioned on a floating interest rate basis, thereby exposing the
borrowers to the uncertainties of interest rate movements and associated interest rate
risk. In order to examine the issue, a Committee (Chairman: Shri K.K.Vohra)
comprising external as well as internal experts has been set up to assess the feasibility of
introduction of long-term fixed interest rate loan products by banks.


The draft report of the Committee will be put out on the Reserve Bank’s website by
mid-November 2012 inviting views/suggestions from the public/stakeholders.

II. Financial Markets
Development of Trade Repository for OTC Derivatives
63.
Pursuant to the announcement made in the Monetary Policy Statement of April 2010,
the reporting platform for over-the-counter (OTC) inter-bank foreign exchange forwards,
swaps and options was launched in July 2012. It has been decided to extend this
arrangement, in phases, in terms of a well-defined roadmap, so as to cover:


trades in foreign currency-rupee forwards and options, foreign currency-foreign
currency forwards and options between banks and their clients under a suitable protocol
to ensure confidentiality of client trades reported by banks to the repository.



currency
swaps,
interest
rate
swaps
(IRS)/forward
rate
agreements
(FRAs)/caps/floors/collars in foreign currency and client trades in rupee IRS.

Working Group on G-secs and Interest Rate Derivatives Markets
64.
As announced in the Monetary Policy Statement of April 2012, the report of the
Working Group (Chairman: Shri R. Gandhi) was put out on the Reserve Bank’s website for
feedback from market participants. Based on the feedback received, the Group finalised its
report on August 10, 2012. The Working Group has recommended measures to promote
liquidity in the secondary market, to improve retail participation in the G-secs market, and to
develop the market for interest rate derivatives. Its recommendations include consolidation
14

of outstanding G-secs, gradually bringing down the upper limit on the Held to Maturity
(HTM) portfolio, steps to promote the term repo market, centralised market makers for retail
participants in G-secs in the long-run, and permitting cash-settled 10-year Interest Rate
Futures (IRFs), subject to appropriate regulations. Some recommendations like truncating
the time-window for bidding in the primary auction, and re-issuances of existing securities in
State Development Loans have been implemented. Following the Group’s recommendations,
it has been decided to:


change the settlement cycle of the primary auction in Treasury Bills (T-Bills) from T+2
to T+1.



undertake reissuance/introduce fungibility of T-Bills/Cash Management Bills with
identical maturity dates.



standardise IRS contracts to facilitate centralised clearing and settlement of these
contracts.

65.

Operational guidelines in this regard are being issued separately.

66.
The remaining recommendations are being examined by the Reserve Bank in
consultation with stakeholders.

Financial Market Infrastructure

Working Group on Export Reporting and Follow-up
67.
Under the Foreign Exchange Management Act (FEMA) 1999, it is obligatory on the
part of exporters to realise and repatriate the full value of exports to India, and monitoring
and follow-up in this regard is done by Reserve Bank through the Authorised Dealer banks.
It has been observed that there has been an increase in the number of unmatched export
transactions between customs and bank reporting which, in turn, attenuates export realisation
follow-up. Accordingly, a Working Group (Chairperson: Smt. Rashmi Fauzdar) was
constituted to identify gaps/lacunae in the current export reporting and follow-up procedure
and to recommend suitable re-engineering of the system. The Group submitted its report on
September 27, 2012, recommending implementation of an IT - based solution using a
secured website of the Reserve Bank to update the export database on a real time basis to
facilitate quicker follow-up/data generation/policy formulation. It has been decided:


to put in place the envisaged architecture by September 2013.

15

III. Financial Stability
Assessment of Financial Stability
68.
The fifth Financial Stability Report (FSR) of June 2012 observed that the
domestic financial system remained robust, notwithstanding an increase in risks to
stability. The Reserve Bank’s Second Systemic Survey Review reflected concerns about
evolving global risks. On the domestic front, lower growth, elevated inflation and high
fiscal and current account deficits were identified as posing risks to financial stability.
Despite rising NPAs in the banking sector, simulations of shocks under different
scenarios for banks as at end-June 2012 showed that the system-level CRAR remained
above the required minimum of 9 per cent. Banks also remained resilient to credit,
market, and liquidity risks. However, distress dependencies between banks have risen,
warranting closer monitoring. The Financial Stability Report reflects the collective
assessment of the Sub-Committee of the Financial Stability and Development Council
(FSDC) on potential risks to financial stability.

Financial Stability and Development
Council (FSDC) and its Sub-Committees
69.
The Sub-Committee of the FSDC is assisted by two Technical Groups, viz., the
Technical Group on Financial Inclusion and Financial Literacy and the Inter-Regulatory
Technical Group. In addition, the Sub-Committee approved the creation of an InterRegulatory Forum under the Chairmanship of the Deputy Governor in charge of banking
supervision in the Reserve Bank with Executive Director level membership from other
regulatory/supervisory agencies to institutionalise the framework for supervision of financial
conglomerates (FCs) and for monitoring and management of systemic risks emanating from
their activities. This Inter-Regulatory Forum would have responsibility for framing policies
for FCs such as identification, group-wide risk management, and corporate governance as
well as for conducting high-level supervision. The Forum would also seek to strengthen the
supervisory co-ordination/cooperation mechanism amongst domestic supervisors for
effective supervision.

16

IV. Credit Delivery and Financial Inclusion
Roadmap for Provision of Banking Services in Unbanked Villages
70.
The Monetary Policy Statement of April 2012 mandated State Level Bankers’
Committees (SLBCs) to prepare a roadmap covering all unbanked villages of population less
than 2,000 and to notionally allot these villages to banks for providing banking services in a
time-bound manner. Accordingly, detailed guidelines were issued to SLBC convenor banks
on June 19, 2012. Furthermore, banks were advised to furnish details of allocation of villages
to respective regional offices of the Reserve Bank by end-August 2012. Quarterly statements
on district-wise and bank-wise progress in opening banking outlets are required to be
submitted from the quarter ending September 2012 by the 10th of the following month to the
Reserve Bank.

Constitution of Financial Inclusion Advisory Committee
71.
Moving towards universal financial inclusion has been a national commitment as well
as a policy priority for the Reserve Bank. In order to spearhead efforts towards greater
financial inclusion, the Reserve Bank constituted a Financial Inclusion Advisory Committee
(Chairman:
Dr. K.C. Chakrabarty). The collective expertise and experience of the members will be
leveraged to explore viable and sustainable banking services delivery models focusing on
accessible and affordable financial services, developing products and processes for rural as
well as urban consumers presently outside the banking network and suggesting the
appropriate regulatory framework to ensure that financial inclusion and financial stability
move in tandem. The first meeting of the Committee will be held in December 2012.

Redefining the Priority Sector
72.
As indicated in the SQR of October 2011, the Reserve Bank constituted a Committee
(Chairman:
Shri M. V. Nair) to re-examine existing classifications and suggest revised guidelines with
regard to priority sector lending. The Committee submitted its report in February 2012.
Based on the discussion with various stakeholders and in the light of the
comments/suggestions received, guidelines on priority sector lending were revised on July
20, 2012. The overall target under the priority sector for domestic scheduled commercial
banks has been left unchanged at 40 per cent of the Adjusted Net Bank Credit (ANBC) or

17

Credit Equivalent (CE) amount of Off-Balance Sheet Exposure (OBE), whichever is higher,
as on March 31 of the previous year. Targets under both direct and indirect agriculture have
also been kept unchanged at 13.5 percent and 4.5 percent, respectively. Foreign banks with
20 or more branches have been brought at par with the domestic commercial banks in terms
of the target/sub-targets under priority sector lending. The target under the priority sector for
foreign banks with less than 20 branches has been set at 32 per cent of ANBC or CE of OBE,
whichever is higher, as on March 31 of the previous year, without any sub-target.
73.
To address concerns raised by banks on the revised priority sector guidelines,
discussions were held with the Chairman and Managing Directors (CMDs)/Chief Executive
Officers (CEOs) and with operational heads of priority sector departments of select banks.
74.
Foreign banks have to prepare roadmaps for meeting the targets over a period of five
years and their performance vis-à-vis targets will be reviewed periodically.
75.

Based on the feedback received, it has been decided that:



loans up to `20 million to partnership firms, cooperatives and corporates directly
engaged in agriculture and allied activities under partnership, rural cooperative and
corporate categories will also be classified as direct finance to agriculture.



bank loans to Housing Finance Companies (HFCs) for on-lending for housing up to `1
million per borrower, may be included under the priority sector, provided the interest
rate charged to the ultimate borrower by the HFC does not exceed two percentage points
above the lowest interest rate of the lending bank for housing loans.

76.

Guidelines on additions/amendments have since been issued.

Urban Cooperative Banks (UCBs) Repo in Corporate Bonds
77.
In the SQR of October 2009, the Reserve Bank had announced the introduction of
repo in corporate bonds and issued the ‘Repo in Corporate Debt Securities (Reserve Bank)
Directions, 2010’ in January 2010. On the basis of requests received from
Federations/Associations of UCBs, it has been decided:

78.

to include scheduled UCBs with strong financials and sound risk management practices
as eligible participants to undertake repo transactions in corporate bonds.
Detailed guidelines are being issued separately.

18

Licences for New Urban Cooperative Banks
79.
Based on comments/feedback received from the public on the recommendations of
the Expert Committee (Chairman: Shri Y. H. Malegam), it has been decided to initiate steps
for setting up of new UCBs after issues relating to governance arrangements are resolved
with the Government.

Licensing of Cooperatives
80.
The Committee on Financial Sector Assessment (Chairman: Dr. Rakesh Mohan and
Co-Chairman: Shri Ashok Chawla) had recommended that rural cooperative banks which
failed to obtain a license by end-March 2012 should not be allowed to operate. The Reserve
Bank, along with the National Bank for Agriculture and Rural Development (NABARD),
implemented a roadmap for issuing licenses to unlicensed state cooperative banks (StCBs)
and district central cooperative banks (DCCBs) in a non-disruptive manner to ensure the
completion of licensing work by end-March 2012.After considering the NABARD’s
recommendations for issuance of licenses, one out of 31 StCBs and 42 out of 371 DCCBs
were unable to meet the licensing criteria by end-March 2012.
81.
Subsequently, the StCB and 16 of the 42 DCCBs were recommended by the
NABARD for issuance of licences, since these banks attained the licensing norms following
release of funds by the State Governments. The remaining 26 DCCBs which have not met
the licensing criteria within the extended period, i.e., before September 30, 2012 continue to
be under directions. Task Forces set up by the Reserve Bank in these States for the purpose
have observed that these DCCBs are unviable in their present form and their continued
existence cannot be sustained. Various alternatives are being analysed to ensure that the
cooperative structure in these States does not get adversely affected.

Streamlining Short-Term
Cooperative Credit Structure
82.
In order to examine issues of structural constraints and to explore strengthening of the
rural cooperative credit architecture with appropriate institutions and instruments to fulfil
credit needs, it was proposed to constitute a Working Group to review the Short-Term
Cooperative Credit Structure (STCCS). Accordingly, the Reserve Bank constituted an Expert
Committee (Chairman: Dr. Prakash Bakshi) to undertake an in-depth analysis of the STCCS
and examine various alternatives with a view to reducing the cost of credit and the feasibility
of setting up of a two-tier STCCS as against the existing three-tier structure. The report of
the Committee is expected by end-December 2012.
19

Defining Sick, Micro and Small Enterprises (MSEs)
83.
In recognition of the problem being faced by the Micro and Small Enterprises (MSEs)
Sector, particularly with respect to rehabilitation of potentially viable sick units, the Reserve
Bank had constituted a Working Group (Chairman: Dr. K. C. Chakrabarty), which
recommended a change in the definition of sickness and in the procedure for assessing the
viability of sick MSE units. It was decided that the Ministry of Micro, Small and Medium
Enterprises (MSME), Government of India, would constitute a Committee to examine the
proposal. Following the submission of the report by this Committee, it is proposed:


84.

to modify the existing definition of sickness of micro and small enterprises (as defined
in the MSMED Act, 2006) and lay down a procedure for assessing the viability of sick
units in the sector.
Detailed guidelines in this regard are being issued separately.

Customer Service
Committee on Customer Service in Banks
85.
Of the recommendations of the Committee on Customer Service in Banks (Chairman:
Shri M. Damodaran) constituted by the Reserve Bank, 152 have been implemented,
including 142 in respect of which the Indian Banks’ Association (IBA) issued guidelines to
banks. They include spelling out Most Important Terms and Conditions (MITCs) for
products and services that are of critical importance to consumers; strict adherence by banks
to the time schedule prescribed under extant regulatory guidelines for disposing of loan
applications; and issue of ATM cards only at the option of the customers on written request.
Ten recommendations implemented by issue of regulatory guidelines include instructions to
banks on abolition of foreclosure charges on floating rate home loans; introduction of Basic
Savings Account; Unique Identification Number (UID) as Know Your Customer (KYC) for
opening of No Frills Account; and differential merchant discount/fee for debit cards.

Banking Ombudsman Scheme (BOS) 2006
86.
Drawing on the recommendations of the Committee on Customer Service in Banks
and the suggestions given by the Rajya Sabha Committee on Subordinate Legislation in
their 183rd report, a Working Group (Chairperson: Smt. Suma Varma) has been constituted
in the Reserve Bank to review, update, and revise the BOS, 2006 in the light of the

20

recommendations and suggestions. The Working Group is expected to submit its report by
end-December 2012.

V. Regulatory and Supervisory Measures
Basel III Disclosure Requirements on Regulatory Capital Composition
87.
As announced in the Monetary Policy Statement of April 2012, the Reserve Bank
issued guidelines on implementation of Basel III Capital Regulations on May 2, 2012 to all
scheduled commercial banks (excluding LABs and RRBs). The Basel Committee on
Banking Supervision (BCBS) has finalised proposals on disclosure requirements in respect
of the composition of regulatory capital, aimed at improving transparency of regulatory
capital reporting as well as market discipline. As these disclosures have to be given effect by
national authorities by June 30, 2013, it has been decided:


to issue draft guidelines on composition of capital disclosure requirements by endDecember 2012.

Banks’ Exposures to Central Counterparties (CCP)
88.
The BCBS has also issued an interim framework for determining capital requirements
for bank exposures to CCPs. This framework is being introduced as an amendment to the
existing Basel II capital adequacy framework and is intended to create incentives to increase
the use of CCPs. These standards will come into effect on January 1, 2013. Accordingly, it
has been decided:


to issue draft guidelines on capital requirements for bank exposures to central
counterparties, based on the interim framework of the BCBS, by mid-November 2012.

Core Principles for Effective Banking Supervision
89.
The Basel Committee has issued a revised version of the Core Principles in
September 2012 to reflect the lessons learned during the recent global financial crisis. In this
context, it is proposed:


to carry out a self-assessment of the existing regulatory and supervisory practices based
on the revised Core Principles and to initiate steps to further strengthen the regulatory
and supervisory mechanism.

21

Review of the Prudential Guidelines on Restructuring of Advances by Banks/Financial
Institutions
90.
As indicated in the Monetary Policy Statement of April 2012, a Working Group
(Chairman: Shri B. Mahapatra) reviewed the existing prudential guidelines on restructuring
of advances by banks/financial institutions. The report of the Working Group was submitted
in July and was placed on the website of the Reserve Bank inviting comments from the
stakeholders.
91.
The recommendations of the Working Group as also the comments/suggestions
received in this regard are under examination and draft guidelines will be issued by endJanuary 2013. As an immediate measure, it has been decided to:

92.

increase the provision for restructured standard accounts from the existing 2.0 per cent
to 2.75 per cent.
Detailed guidelines in this regard are being issued separately.

Non-Performing Assets (NPAs) and Restructuring of Advances
93.
NPAs and restructured loans of banks have been increasing significantly. A major
reason for deterioration in the asset quality of banks is the lack of effective information
sharing among them, despite specific instructions issued in September and December 2008
regarding sharing of information on credit, derivatives and unhedged foreign currency
exposure. It is, therefore, advised that:


banks should strictly adhere to the instructions regarding sharing of information relating
to credit, derivatives and unhedged foreign currency exposures among themselves and
put in place an effective mechanism for information sharing by end-December 2012;



any sanction of fresh loans/ad hoc loans/renewal of loans to new/existing borrowers
with effect from January 1, 2013 should be done only after obtaining/sharing necessary
information; and



non-adherence to these instructions would be viewed seriously by the Reserve Bank and
banks would be liable to action, including imposition of penalty, wherever considered
appropriate.

94.

Detailed guidelines in this regard are being issued separately.

22

Monitoring of Unhedged Foreign Currency Exposure
95.
Unhedged forex exposure of corporates is a source of risk to them as well as to the
financing banks and the financial system. Large unhedged forex exposures have resulted in
accounts becoming NPAs in some cases. Banks were, therefore, advised in February 2012
that they should rigorously evaluate the risks arising out of unhedged foreign currency
exposure of the corporates and price them in the credit risk premium while extending fundbased and non fund-based credit facilities. Further, banks were also advised to consider
stipulating a limit on unhedged position of corporates on the basis of banks’ Board-approved
policy. Despite these instructions, these risks are not being evaluated rigorously and built
into pricing of credit. It is, therefore, expected that:


96.

banks should, in accordance with the guidelines of February 2012, put in place a proper
mechanism to rigorously evaluate the risks arising out of unhedged foreign currency
exposure of corporates and price them in the credit risk premium, and also consider
stipulating a limit on the unhedged position of corporates on the basis of banks’ Boardapproved policy. Banks should furnish compliance/action taken reports to the Reserve
Bank before end-December 2012 after obtaining the approval of their Board of
Directors.
Detailed guidelines in this regard are being issued separately.

Dissemination of Credit Information
97.
Credit Information Companies (CICs) are an important part of the financial sector
infrastructure. The success of the credit information collection and dissemination system
depends on the quality and timeliness of data supplied by credit institutions to the CICs, and
also extensive use of data available with CICs by credit institutions for taking decisions on
loan applications. Consequent to operationalisation of the CICs (Regulation) Act, 2005 with
effect from December 14, 2006 four CICs are currently operating in India.
98.
It has been observed that the number of credit information reports accessed by credit
institutions at the time of sanctioning loans is considerably less than the number of credit
applications considered by them. This shows that credit institutions may not be furnishing
accurate and timely credit data to the CICs in some cases and also are not relying as much on
available credit information at the time of taking credit decisions as they should, even after
taking into account the fact that records pertaining to first-time borrowers may not be
available in the system. It is, therefore, expected that:

23



99.

credit institutions should furnish timely and accurate credit information on their
borrowers and make extensive use of available credit information as a part of their
credit appraisal process.
Detailed guidelines in this regard are being issued separately.

Strengthening Regulatory Framework: Resolution Regime for Financial Institutions
100. The subprime crisis brought to the fore the importance of a cross-border resolution
regime to deal with the Systemically Important Financial Institutions (SIFIs) which may
come under stress and require resolution. In October 2011, the Financial Stability Board
(FSB) proposed a set of twelve core elements, viz., the “Key Attributes”, as essential
components for effective resolution of SIFIs. As decided by the Sub-Committee of the
FSDC, a Working Group on a comprehensive resolution regime for all types of financial
institutions in India has been set up with Shri Anand Sinha, Deputy Governor, Reserve Bank
as the Chairman and Secretary, Department of Economic Affairs, Ministry of Finance,
Government of India, as Co-Chairman.

Review of KYC Instructions
101. The Reserve Bank has received complaints pertaining to KYC norms relating to areas
such as documentary proof of identity/address, need for introduction for opening of bank
accounts, and periodicity for review of KYC documents. In view of these developments, it is
proposed:


to review the existing KYC norms for simplifying them within the provisions of
Prevention of Money Laundering Act/Rules (PML Act/Rules) and international
standards.

Bank Finance for the Purchase of Gold and Advances against Gold
102. In terms of extant guidelines, no advances should be granted by banks against gold
bullion to dealers/traders in gold if, in their assessment, such advances are likely to be
utilised for purposes of financing gold purchase at auctions and/or speculative holding of
stocks and bullion. In this context, the significant rise in imports of gold in recent years is a
cause for concern as direct bank financing for purchase of gold in any form viz.,
bullion/primary gold/jewellery/gold coin could lead to fuelling of demand for gold for
speculative purposes. The Monetary Policy Statement of April 2012 announced the
constitution of a Working Group (Convenor: Shri K.U.B. Rao) to study issues relating to
gold imports and gold loans by Non-Banking Financial Companies (NBFCs) in India. The
24

Working Group submitted its draft report in August 2012. Pending a decision on its
recommendations, it is proposed to advise banks that:

103.

other than working capital finance, banks are not permitted to finance purchase of gold
in any form.
Detailed guidelines in this regard are being issued separately.

Branch Authorisation Policy
Opening Administrative/Controlling Offices in Tier 1 Centres
104. Currently, domestic scheduled commercial banks (excluding RRBs) are permitted to
open branches, including Regional Offices and Zonal Offices in Tier 2 to Tier 6 centres
(with population up to 99,999 as per Census 2001) and in rural, semi-urban and urban
centres in the North-Eastern States and Sikkim without the requirement of taking permission
from the Reserve Bank in each case, subject to reporting. With a view to further increasing
operational flexibility of banks, it is proposed:


105.

to permit domestic scheduled commercial banks (other than RRBs) to open offices
performing purely administrative and controlling functions (Regional Offices and Zonal
Offices) in Tier 1 centres, subject to reporting.
Detailed guidelines in this regard are being issued separately.

Issue of Co-branded Rupee Denominated Pre-paid/Debit Cards
106. In order to obviate the need for banks to approach the Reserve Bank for every cobranding arrangement, it is proposed:

107.

to accord general permission to banks for issue of co-branded debit and rupee
denominated pre-paid instruments, subject to certain conditions.
Detailed guidelines in this regard are being issued separately.

Working Group on Pricing of Credit
108. As proposed in the SQR of October 2011, a Working Group on pricing of credit was
constituted (Chairman: Shri Anand Sinha) to look into the principles governing proper,
transparent and non-discriminatory pricing of credit. The report of the Working Group is
expected by end-December 2012.
Supervisory Policies, Procedures and Processes
109. The High Level Steering Committee (HLSC) (Chairman: Dr. K. C. Chakrabarty) set
up by the Reserve Bank to review the existing supervisory policies, procedures and
processes for commercial banks in India submitted its report on June 11, 2012. The HLSC

25

has recommended a shift in the supervisory approach from a transaction-testing based
CAMELS framework to a risk based approach for early identification of risks and for
enabling appropriate supervisory intervention in a timely manner. A phased approach for
transition to risk based supervision (RBS) is being adopted. While 50 per cent of banks are to
be covered under RBS from the next supervisory cycle beginning April 2013, the remaining
banks would be covered subsequently. In line with the Committee’s recommendations, banks
have been advised to assess their risk management architecture, culture, practices and related
processes against the essential requirements identified as prerequisites for introduction of
RBS. Banks should also assess and upgrade their human resources capacity for handling risk
management systems, processes and MIS to facilitate the switch over to RBS.
Definition of Infrastructure Lending
110. Banks’ lending to the infrastructure sector has grown significantly. As a multiplicity
of definitions among various regulators gives rise to confusion and difficulties, the
Government of India has notified a master list of infrastructure sectors/sub-sectors in March
2012. Accordingly, it is proposed:

111.

to harmonise the definition of infrastructure for the purpose of banks’ lending with the
master list notified by the Government of India.
Detailed guidelines in this regard are being issued separately.

Intra-Group Transactions and Exposures
112. On August 14, 2012 the Reserve Bank issued draft guidelines on management of
Intra-Group Transactions and Exposures (ITEs) applicable to scheduled commercial banks.
The draft guidelines contain both quantitative limits for the financial ITEs and prudential
measures for non-financial ITEs to ensure that banks engage in ITEs in a safe and sound
manner in order to contain concentration and contagion risk arising therefrom. These
measures require banks to maintain arms-length relationships in their dealings with group
entities, meet minimum requirements with respect to group risk management and groupwide oversight and adhere to prudential limits on ITEs. Comments/feedback on the draft
guidelines have been sought. It is proposed:


to issue final guidelines on management of ITEs by end-January 2013.

Internal Working Group on Rationalisation of Calendar of Reviews
113. Commercial banks are required to periodically place reviews on different areas of
banks’ operations before their Board of Directors/Management Committee/Audit
Committee of the Board. These reviews are put up as per the calendar prescribed by the
Reserve Bank. This calendar is reviewed by the Reserve Bank from time to time to keep it
relevant to the latest developments. Accordingly, a Working Group on Rationalisation of
26

Calendar of Reviews (Chairman: Shri Deepak Singhal) has been constituted to examine
and review the contents of current prescriptions in this regard. The Group is required to
submit its report by end-December 2012.

VI. Institutional Developments
Non-Banking Financial Companies
Overseas Investment by Core Investment Companies
114. Following the announcement in the Monetary Policy Statement of April 2012, draft
guidelines for overseas investment by Core Investment Companies were placed on the
Reserve Bank’s website in May 2012. Comments received from the public are under
examination and it is proposed:


to issue the final guidelines by end-November 2012.

Regulatory Framework for NBFCs
115. The report of the Working Group on NBFCs (Chairperson: Smt. Usha Thorat) was
placed on the Reserve Bank’s website in August 2011. Based on the feedback received and
further discussions held with various representatives of the sector, it has been decided:


to place draft guidelines for NBFCs on the website for comments by end-November
2012.

Registration of NBFC-Factors
116. Following the notification by the Central Government of the Factoring Regulation
Act, 2011, the Reserve Bank has put in place a detailed regulatory framework for NBFCFactors on July 23, 2012. NBFC-Factors shall have a minimum Net Owned Fund of `50
million for registration; factoring activity should constitute at least 75 percent of total assets;
and income derived from factoring business should not be less than 75 percent of gross
income. NBFC-Factors intending to deal in forex through export/import factoring will need
an authorisation under FEMA, 1999 from the Reserve Bank.
Automated Data Flow from Banks
117. As stated in the Monetary Policy Statement of April 2012, banks are required to
implement suitable solutions to generate all their returns to be submitted to the Reserve
Bank from their source systems without any manual intervention. The process is expected
to be completed by end March 2013. The Reserve Bank is closely monitoring the progress
of implementation. It is reiterated that banks put in place the appropriate systems to meet
the objective stated within the stipulated timeline.
27

Payment Systems in India: Vision 2012-15
118. The roadmap for effecting further improvements in the payments system in the
country over the next three years was laid out in the document entitled “Payment Systems in
India: Vision 2012-15”, released on October 1, 2012 after extensive public consultations.
The Vision statement articulates the key goals to be achieved. The overall policy stance is
oriented towards promoting a less cash society and, in doing so, aims to reach out beyond the
currently served target groups, thereby facilitating greater financial inclusion in the country.
As a first step, the Merchant Discount Rate (MDR) was reduced for debit cards to encourage
all categories and types of merchants to deploy the card acceptance infrastructure and also
facilitate acceptance of small value transactions.
Disincentivising Issuance and Usage of Cheques
119. Given the still high use of cheques, any strategy to discourage the use of cheques by
individuals as well as institutional users has to have a multi-pronged approach encompassing
cost and time considerations, incentives for use of electronic modes of transactions and
disincentives for the use of paper-based instruments. Accordingly, it has been decided to
prepare a Discussion Paper on the subject by end-December 2012 and place it in the public
domain for comments.
Electronic Payments: National Electronic Funds Transfer (NEFT)
120. The NEFT system, introduced in 2005, is now a retail electronic payment product of
system-wide importance. Banks were recently advised to proactively assist customers in
correctly filling in the required details (such as Indian financial system code (IFSC) of
destination bank branch) in the NEFT application form to ensure hassle- and error-free
remittances. As an additional measure aimed at improving the efficiency of the system and
enhancing customer service, it has been decided to introduce with effect from November 19,
2012 an additional batch at 8.00 am in the NEFT system. This is intended to meet the
growing demand and increasing volume of NEFT transactions, and to decongest the build-up
of transactions in the first batch on all days including Saturdays.
Alternate Payments: Committee for Implementation of GIRO Based Payment System
121. Implementation of an electronic GIRO system in India, viz., a payment instruction
from one bank account to another bank account which is initiated by the payer and not the
payee, has been identified as one of the key tasks in Payment Systems in India: Vision 201215. Accordingly, it is proposed to set up a Committee (Chairman: Shri G. Padmanabhan) to
finalise the modalities of GIRO payments - both electronic-and cheque-based.

28

Uniform Routing Code and Account Number Structure
122. In India, different payment systems use different codes for identifying the
bank/branches for routing transactions. A Technical Committee (Chairman: Shri Vijay
Chugh) comprising various stakeholders has been constituted to examine the feasibility of a
uniform routing code and uniform account number across banks. The Committee will
submit its report by end-December 2012.
Using Aadhaar for Authentication for Securing Card Present Transactions
123. One of the recommendations of the Working Group formed for securing card present
transactions (Chairperson: Ms. Gowri Mukherjee) was that banks could consider the
Aadhaar biometric authentication along with the MagStripe as an additional factor of
authentication for card present transactions at ATMs and POS terminals. In order to take this
process forward, a pilot project using Aadhaar as an additional factor of authentication for
card present transactions has been scheduled to be held in Delhi from November 15, 2012.
Based on the outcome of the pilot project, further steps would be taken by the Reserve Bank.
Cheque Truncation System (CTS)
124. Cheque Truncation System (CTS) is an important efficiency enhancement initiative
undertaken by the Reserve Bank in paper clearing, as cheques are still an important mode of
payment in the country. The pan-India roll-out of CTS is envisaged to be completed by endDecember 2013. This is as per the roadmap drawn-up by the National Payments Corporation
of India (NPCI), which has been entrusted with the task.
Currency Management
Distribution Channels of Bank Notes and Coins
125. Pursuant to the announcements made in the Annual Monetary Policy Statement of
April 2012, the CMDs of banks were sensitised to their role in currency management. They
have been advised to identify four-five branches at each of the centres where the Reserve
Bank’s Issue offices are located. These branches would provide exchange facilities for
soiled/mutilated notes as also issue coins to the general public through their dedicated
counters/coin vending machines. These identified branches have to be advised to the
Reserve Bank by end-October 2012. In addition, banks may also take necessary steps to
streamline their systems to provide smooth and unhindered exchange facilities at other
currency chests and branches across the country.

29

Detection and Reporting Mechanism of Counterfeit Banknotes
126. In May 2012, banks were advised to re-align their cash management to ensure that
cash receipts in denominations of `100 and above are not put into re-circulation without
being machine-processed for authenticity. Banks have the option of either providing
machines to their branches or ensuring that branches which do not have the machines are
supplied only machine-processed notes for distribution among the public.
127. It is observed, however, that reporting of detection of counterfeit notes has not
improved on the expected lines. It needs to be emphasised that although 90 per cent of the
currency chests are with the public sector banks, they account for reporting a mere 10 per
cent of counterfeit notes, while private sector banks with less than 10 per cent of currency
chests are reporting 90 per cent of such cases. A review on the status of implementation of
the Reserve Bank’s instructions issued in May 2012 will be made in the first week of
November 2012. It is reiterated that wherever counterfeit notes are detected but not
impounded and reported, it will be construed as wilful involvement of the bank concerned
in circulating counterfeit notes and may attract penal measures.

High Level Committee on Demand for Coins
128. The High Level Committee constituted by the Government of India (Chairman:
Dr. K. C. Chakrabarty) to examine the growing demand for coins submitted its report on
August 14, 2012. Some of the major recommendations include the need for the Reserve
Bank to focus exclusively on management and planning of the currency system, while
the responsibility for distribution of coins and notes among individuals and institutions
should be entirely with banks, subject to compliance with Sections 38 and 39 of Reserve
Bank of India Act, 1934. The Committee has also recommended that if the last mile
connectivity for distributing coins/small notes has to be achieved, there is a need to
introduce alternative avenues for distribution of small notes and coins on behalf of banks.
Banks may, therefore, be encouraged to explore the possibility of introducing the
franchisee model.
129. Furthermore, each bank may be allotted certain areas (districts/States) on the lines of
the Lead Bank Scheme/Service Area Approach for priority sector lending for ensuring that
the area is supplied with coins and clean notes in coordination with other currency chests and
small coin depots in that area. Additional storage points or underground silos can be created
in the space available in mints which can be used as counter- cyclical buffers - they will
store/absorb coins during surplus years and release them during shortages.

30

